26 Reading 3.
READING FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT.
St. Matt. in the 11th chapter, verses 2-10.
At that time, when John heard in prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples, saying to him (Jesus), Are you the one who is to come [to redeem], or do we look for another? And Jesus answered and said to them [John's disciples], Go and tell John what you have heard and seen: the blind receive their sight [being healed], the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have the word of God preached to them [evangelisantur, that is: the word of God is preached to them and they are made good; and blessed is he (i.e., he is) who does not stumble [do not believe] in me. And when they had departed, Jesus began to speak to the multitudes concerning John, saying, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? punishment shaken by the wind (For is there not a man whom pride has shaken or unsteadiness? And what went ye out to see? A man clothed in soft (clothes) [but walking in sackcloth]? And they that are clothed in soft [clothes] are in kings' houses [as proud and delightful]. And what went ye out to see? A prophet? But he saith unto you, more than for a year; this is he of whom it is written [Malachi the prophet writes in 3 ch. 1 v.J: Behold, I send my angel (i.e. messenger: angelus in Greek, messenger in Czech)] before thy face, which shall prepare thy dough before thee.
In this reading there is a mention of the imprisonment of St. John the Baptist of Christ; the second, of the wonderful works of the Lord Jesus Christ; the third,
A. of the praise of St. John. The imprisonment of the reading: "When he hears John in chains the works of Christ." Then know that St. John was already in chains in prison because he had punished King Herod for adultery, as St. Mt. writes in 14 c. 3-4 v. saying: Herod seized John,
and bound him and put him in prison for Herodias, his brother's wife; for John had said to him: It is not fitting for you to have her. And St. Mark says in 6 c. 20 v.: Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just and holy man, and he observed him, and heard him, and did many things, and was glad to obey him. Why? St. John Chrysostom says this in his sermon
Third Sunday in Advent. 27
about St. John: John the Baptist said those things which were of the law, which were of righteousness, which were of the law salvation; certainly he says that which is not to hate, but to love. Again he says: Herod John admonishes with holy admonitions, not with accusations, as a lover of fornication, wanting that he might be saved, but not damned. But since fornication is hard for anyone to remain, therefore Herod did not want fornication to remain and the harlot to leave the adulterous, he bound John and put him in prison; and he, being in chains, having heard of the works of Christ, sent his disciples to him. Therefore the reading says: "When John heard in chains of the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples, saying to him: Are you the one who is to come, or do we look for another?" Then know that holy John does not doubt whether Christ is the one who came to take away the sins of the world; for he first confessed, saying, John 1, 29: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world!" and he knew him, being yet in his mother's womb, and rejoiced; and when he baptized him, he heard the testimony of God the Father, that he was his beloved Son, whom we should obey. But Saint John, having care for his disciples and for other people, asked, that they should not doubt Christ, but should believe in him, obey him, and finally
follow him; and therefore he commanded his disciples to ask Christ, saying: Art thou he that should come as the promised redeemer, or look we for another?
And further reading: "And Jesus answering said unto them: Go and tell John those things which ye have heard and seen;" for as Saint Luke writes in 7 c. 21 v., at that hour He healed many of infirmities, and of plagues, and of evil spirits, and to many blind he gave sight. And answering, he said to them: Go and tell John those things which you have heard in the sermon, and seen in the miracles. Here St. Ambrose says: The Lord answers rather by his deeds than by words. And St. Jerome says: Be silent in words, speak in deeds. And so the gracious Savior gave the teaching, not to John, but to his disciples, that they might believe that he was the one whom they were waiting for, to take away sins and deliver from damnation. And to show that he was the one, having healed many, he also says: "The blind see," and so on. Here
B. Know that by the blind are meant those who sin out of foolishness; the lame, those who do both evil and good; lepers those who sin from great desire; deaf those who are hardened in anger; dead those who sin from great habit. And all these
28 Reading 3.
now by the grace of our Savior can be healed, and many are already healed, so that those who sinned from stupidity now see, knowing what sin is, and how they were blinded by sin; then the lame, who were both evil and good, are always well alive; and the lepers, who were impure through sin from desire, are clean; and the deaf, who were indifferent to the word of God, are now willing to obey it; and the dead, that is, who were dead in the soul through mortal sin and sinned from habit, are now From this custom arises; and in these five spiritual things there is a greater wonder than in bodily healings, and a greater grace of God than in the former.
h. And then the sixth miracle was given by the dear Savior, saying: "The poor benefit from the word of God," Latin: evangelisantur, that is: reading, which is the word of God, they enjoy, and thus benefit themselves and others, they hear themselves and teach others.
"The poor," understand the humble in spirit, they benefit from the word of God. C. Know then that by preaching the word of God the mind is enlightened, the other desire is regulated, the evil desire is extinguished, the stubbornness in anger is abolished, sin is driven away, and the grace of God is born in man. From this know that whoever of these six benefits, hears the word of God, none of which is in himself, has the sign that he listens to the word of God unprofitably. About the blessedness of the poor in spirit, to whom the Savior is sent to preach to them As He Himself says through Isaiah, Is. 61, 1-2, Luke 4, 18-19: To preach good tidings to the meek, He has sent me, To bind up the brokenhearted, To proclaim release to the captives, And opening of the prison to them that are shut, To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. D. Further in the reading the Savior says: "And blessed is he who shall not be offended in me!" Here know that there are various people worse than Christ. Some are worse than His mercy, Saying that He does not avenge, Having avenged, or that He does not avenge, Having avenged; About the first saying, as Habakkuk says in 1 ch. 13 v.: Why do You not look upon those who do evil? That is, Why do You not avenge? Of the second, the lazy servant said, Matt. in 25:24: "I know that you are cruel!" Some are worse than his wisdom, thinking that he would do something that he should not do; like those who blaspheme, or those who think that they could invent better than God has done; and so they are surprised that good things happen to the wicked, saying the word of Jeremiah in 15:15: "Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Know that why does it happen to the wicked according to their will?" Not-
Third Sunday in Advent. 29
who are worse, not wanting to suffer with him, as his disciples were offended, to whom he said, Matt. 26:31: "All of you will be offended because of me!" Some are worse off because of his poverty, as priests in general, who do not want to be poor voluntarily; so the young man who left Christ was offended, being grieved, when he said to him, Matt. 19:21: Go, sell all that you have, and give to the poor, and follow me. Some are worse off because of his words, saying with the Jews in 6 c. 60 v. S. John: This is a hard saying, and who can listen to it? And so all are worse off who do not keep his commandments, thinking them to be hard; and so in general, those who do not believe in him and in him, and who do not fulfill what he commanded, are worse off because of Christ. Therefore, blessed is he who does not stumble at all because of him; for although many were stumbled, but later returned, they were made better by his grace.
E. Then the reading: "And when they were departed, Jesus began to speak unto the multitudes concerning John: What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a chastisement shaken with the wind?" as if to say: Do ye suppose that John was as chastisement empty within, having no grace of God in him? And do ye suppose that he was moved by flattery, that he sent unto me, and by inconstancy, that he first bore witness unto me, saying, John 1:29: Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world? And ye say, Art thou, or look we for another? Know that he hath not moved from his testimony, as a chastisement shaketh before the wind. Here St. Gregory speaks thus: The reed, as soon as the wind toucheth it, it shaketh it to one side. And what by chastisement? One is the carnal desire, which, as soon as it is touched by favor or reproach, immediately turns aside. For if the breeze of favor blows, it rejoices, boasts, and all turns to favor; but if the breeze of reproach blows from where the breeze of praise was blowing, then it immediately turns to anger. But John did not run away from punishment swayed by the wind, because neither the favor of praise made him a flatterer, nor did anyone's anger make him cruel, nor did common things elevate him in pride, nor did adverse things humble him in virtue; therefore he does not run away from a reed swayed by the wind, which no thing moves from the uprightness of its state. Therefore, let us learn, beloved, that we may not be like reeds tossed by the wind, let us establish our purpose amidst the air of tongues, let our state of mind stand unmoved, let no slander incite us to anger, nor let any slander incline us to favor, nor let contrary things trouble us, so that we, who are established in the constancy of faith, may not be incessantly moved by the things of this world. This is St. Gregory. Briefly understand: let not yourself be moved either by flattery to pride, or by slander to anger, or by honor to the sin of pride or pleasure, nor let adversities, as poverty or any other thing, move us to impatience. If you do so, then you will not be shaken by the wind of punishment and you will be worthy of being praised by Christ, as he praised Saint John.
F. Further Christ says: "And what did you go out to see? a man clothed in soft clothes?" As if he were saying: John is not a flatterer; for if he wanted to flatter, he would not have lived in the desert, nor would he have sat in a hut, being in Herod's prison. If he wanted to flatter, then he would have flattered kings, not me
poor man; for those who want to walk in soft and beautiful clothes, are in kings' houses and flatter. Oh, what are these flatterers, and especially the priests in the courts of princes, kings and lords, and especially in the court of the Pope! to whom the greatest flatterers climb, and pray and bow
more than the Lord God. And all this they do, that they may walk in soft and expensive clothes, that they may breed pride, pleasure and greed! Surely they are far from the life of John who have gone astray! And woe to us, who do not want to suffer, and who, living lightly, want to be saved! Woe to those who wear proud clothes for the sake of boasting, who cut them strangely, who have a lot of them, of which moths enjoy as much or more than they do! And those St. James the Apostle exhorts, saying in 5 c. 1-3 v.: Weep now, ye rich, and howl for your miseries that are come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten, your gold and silver are corroded, and rust shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh and your body as fire! Remembering this, wise men do not multiply costly raiment for themselves; but as they may likewise cover their shame and ward off the cold, and satisfy the need of the body, so they use raiment. For for these things was raiment given by God to Eve and Adam, when they sinned; for the crown gave them to cover their shame, and a fur coat to keep them from the cold. And John had a coat, by which he repelled both shame and cold; because the Savior praises him for not walking in soft clothing.
Further reading: "And what did you go out to see? a prophet?" as if to say that John is not silent out of envy, as if he wanted to be called a prophet over me; because "but I tell you that he is more than any prophet, for he is the one of whom it is written, 'Behold, I send my angel before your face.'" This speech is the speech of God the Father to the Son; for God the Father, before Christ, his Son, sent John to preach first, to baptize first, to die first for preaching, and thus he prepared the way for the people to know Christ and believe in him. Therefore he said to the priests of Jerusalem, in 1 K. 26-27 v. S. John: I baptize with water, but among you stands one whom you do not know: he is he who comes after me, he who is preferred before me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose. And so John was sent by God, that before Christ, as a man, he first preached, first baptized, and first prepared the way for the people; and that way is the way of Christ, which he followed after John, to baptize us, to free us from sins, and finally, even though we are good, he gave us eternal life by grace.
