36 we read 5.
FIRST SUNDAY AFTER THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.
St. Luke in chapter 2, verses 33-40.
At that time his father [Joseph] and his mother [Mary] were amazed at the things which were spoken concerning him. And Simeon [the holy priest] blessed them and said,k To Mary his mother: Behold, this [your son] is laidtofor the fall (offense) and for the rising again of many sins in Israel [in Judaism], and for a sign of peace, because he has reconciled God with man], who will be contradicted (spoken against), and through his (his) soul a sword (great pain) will pierce (great pain) so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. And there was Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Samuel (that man) of the tribe of Asher (that man who was one of the twelve patriarchs), and she was a prophetess for many days. And she had lived (worthy) with her husband seven years from her virginity, and she was a widow (that is, a widow) until she was fourscore and four years old, who departed not from the temple (time) with fastings and prayers, serving (God) night and day. And she at that hour (when Mary brought into the temple diet) And when they had performed all things according to the law of God, they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth, where Christ was preached. And the child grew and waxed strong, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.
This first reading shows that Joseph, the supposed father, but the true foster-father of Christ, and Mary, his true mother, were amazed at the things that happened to the child Christ from his birth: as the angels appeared and sang when he was born; the shepherds came to find the child in the manger, along with the angelic announcement; and then the three kings came, worshiped him and offered him gifts. Therefore the reading Luke 2:33: "Father
Sunday after the birth of Christ. 37
and the mother marveled at the things which were spoken of him. "The angel said, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people: for unto us is born a Saviour, which is Christ. And should we not marvel? Yet Isaiah in 9 ch. 6 v. said, His name shall be called Wonderful. Why? Because he is called Emmanuel, that is, God with us. And is it not a strange thing, that the eternal God is with us a temporal man, immortal with mortal, immeasurable with a little child, untouched by heaven, touched by the womb of the virgin Mary, impatient with the patient, glorious with the poor? Surely a strange thing, which the Gentiles and Jews do not want to come to, saying that it cannot be; but God has given us this (gift) wonderful, that we may marvel, and give thanks to his grace greatly, that by his power For our salvation, the eternal one deigned to be a man with us, that he might redeem us sinners from our sins. For the angel said to Joseph, Matt. 1:21: You shall call his name Jesus, i.e. Savior; for he shall save his people from their sins. And who would not be surprised that God wanted to be our brother and was pleased to make peace with us in everything, except sin? Or says St. Paul, Ad Heb. 2:11: He wanted to be like his brothers in all things, so that he took on humanity, he wanted to be hungry, cold, thirsty, painful, and so mortal with us. Who would not be surprised that an angel announced, the power of God made it possible, the Holy Spirit visited, a virgin believed, conceived by faith, a virgin gave birth, remained a virgin, and God gave birth? Eternal God, born of God the Father, a man was born of a virgin! A strange thing! the rich lord of the whole world had no room in his city in the inn, that is, in the inn, where those who were there were, who could not have inns elsewhere, were in, and they were amazed.
The second reading shows that Simenon, the holy priest, blessed them, Christ and his mother, not as more worthy, but as an elder; and this blessing was a giving of praise, not a waving of hands. And so the lesser can bless the more worthy, yes the scripture says, Daniel 3, 57: Bless all the creatures of God God. That is: praise; as elsewhere the scripture says, Psalm 148, 4. And Simenon said to Mary, prophesying: "This one is laid," that is, given, "to suffer and to cause many to fall," that is, not to all in him-
38 Reading 5.
believers, and thus also to evil Christians, who without their fault are offended by him, and fall into damnation; and he is also given "for the resurrection of many," that is, to all who believe in him finally, so that with his help they may rise from sins to grace and salvation. And further Simeon says that Jesus was placed "for a sign," that is, of peace between God and man, "which was contradicted," by bishops, priests, scribes, and other wise men; for they especially
from the teaching of the devil they contradicted, that is, they spoke contrary to that dear Savior, who was placed as a sign of peace between God and man, between angel and man, and between man and man; for he has reconciled God and angel with man, and also man with man. Therefore he is called the Prince of Peace, to whom it is for honor and for the people's comfort, when
born, angels sang, Luke 2:14: Peace to men on earth of good will! Therefore, when he was with his disciples, he often spoke to them about peace; and wanting from them, he said to them John 14:27: Peace I leave with you, my peace I give to you!
Simeon further prophesies what will happen to the Virgin Mary, saying: "And a sword will pierce through your soul," that is: your soul, which is his soul by creation and election from eternity to salvation; "a sword will pierce through," that is, the pain of your martyrdom. And so "your soul" is one word; and if you say: "your" soul, well
You are right, but you add "him" to the reason already laid down, you are right. And that the sword of pain for the passion of Christ was not in vain, therefore Simeon further says: "that the thought might be revealed from many hearts." This can be interpreted firstly in this way: that the unceasing thought of the apostles, who had for three days doubted about his resurrection from the dead, might be revealed to the holy church, so that they were mistaken, and the Virgin Mary preserved the faith of the holy church for those three days, having great pain for his passion. Second, next to the interpretation of Origen: that therefore the Virgin Mary was allowed to suffer so much pain for the passion of her son, so that the thought of the mysterious sins from the religion grievous to her might be revealed, so that by her merit she might be forgiven. Thirdly in this way: that the thought might be revealed from many hearts; that is, that she, being like a chest, which through great pain preserved the faith and works of Christ, might move the hearts of the apostles to reveal, describing to the church, the holy works of Christ; and it came to pass that
The first Sunday after the birth of Christ. 39
from the pain of the Virgin Mary's heart, thoughts are revealed to many hearts. Further reading: "And Anna was a prophetess." This Anna in the first state of virginity, without a husband, was a pure virgin; secondly, after the state of virginity, being married, was with a man in a state of marriage worthily for seven years; and thirdly, from the death of her husband she kept her widowhood religiously, until the age of eighty-four. Therefore she was worthy to bear witness to the Lord Christ. And not in vain did St. Luke so diligently write down her life and generation; for she signified the state of the Virgin Mary, who before the marriage with Joseph was like Anna, after the marriage she was Joseph's true wife, although she never intended to do so, and after Joseph's death she was a widow. And this Anna is the third one mentioned in Holy Scripture: the first Anna was good, the mother of the great prophet Samuel, 1 Reg. 1, 2; the second Anna was the wife of Tobias the old man and the mother of Tobias the young man; and the third Anna is the one mentioned in the reading, who was the daughter of Samuel, the man so called, who came from the tribe of Asher, the man so called, who was one of the twelve sons of Jacob.
Further reading: "who did not depart from the temple," that is, when it was time to be in the temple; "fasting," that is, with much; "and serving with prayers day and night." Thus does everyone serve who diligently avoids sin and prays in the time borrowed from God; for as Saints Augustine and Gregory say, neither the sleep of a good man nor any deed is without reward. Therefore St. Augustine says: If you go to plow and do not intend to till, and you are dead without sin
If you go to the market and do not intend to deceive, then you praise God; if you sit down to eat, and do not eat, then you praise God. And so also about other deeds. Then further: Anna, at the hour when Christ was offered in the temple, praised the Lord God and spoke about his dignity and about the Virgin Mary to all the faithful, who were waiting for the redemption of the people of Israel.
It is further written: "And when they had accomplished all things according to the law of God," that is, when his mother according to the law offered him in the temple, and redeemed him with two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, as St. Luke says, "they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth," where Christ was preached and brought up. "And when he had
40 Reading 5.
"grew," understand in the body, as other children grow, "and became stronger," also in the body, for in this he was like us, that he grew and was stronger besides the body when he was a man, than when he was a child, although as a child, since God held and governed the whole world. Therefore, so that we may not change, that he would grow and become stronger in the soul, immediately the reading: "full of wisdom." So full of wisdom was the child, as he is today; for nothing is more wise than the man Christ today than he was immediately after the incarnation in the life of the virgin. Further it is written: "and the grace of God abounded in him;" for it was the true God of mercy, who out of great mercy deigned to be a child for us. To whom be praise for ever!
