Second Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 41
SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE Nativity of Christ.  St. Luke in chapter 2, verses 42-52.
At that time, when Jesus was twelve years old, when they (Mary and Joseph) went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast (of the Passover), and when the days were fulfilled (the seven days) as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem, and his father and mother knew not: and supposing him to be in the company [in the company of friends on the way], they went a day's journey (first), and sought him (second day) among their friends (natural) and acquaintances, and not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking him. And it came to pass after three days, that they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers [masters], both listening (and listening) to them, and asking them questions (and asking them); and they were astonished [did with fear] All who heard him were astonished at his wisdom and his answers, and when they saw it, they marveled. And his mother said to him, Son, why have you done this to us? And your father and I, having been grieving, have been looking for you. And he said to them, How is it that you were looking for me? Did you not know that I must be about my Father's business? And they did not understand the word that he spoke to them. And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them. And his mother kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man.
Saint Luke, from the teaching of the Virgin Mary, clearly describes the works of Christ which He did in His youth, saying: When Jesus was twelve years old, He went up to Jerusalem with Mary and Joseph to the feast of the Passover. For all the young men of the Jews had
They were to go to Jerusalem for three feasts, as it is written in Exodus 23:17; but those who lived far away were permitted to go only once for the great feast, when they ate the lamb. And so
42 Reading 6.
Jesus, as the reading goes, had already gone to Jerusalem, and in God's way from eternity, after the feasts were over, he remained in the temple, for the teaching of the holy church, and especially to teach the bishops and priests how, after the service of God, they should be diligent in teaching for the benefit of the holy church. But what a sin! The present bishops and priests, and especially the canons and empty altar servers, cannot wait for the service of God to be completed soon, so that they can turn to the tavern and others everywhere in customs unworthy of priests, or what a sin to dance! And the monks at the new mass are dancing, unfaithful devils and Judases! They do not remember that the Lord Jesus, serving the Mass, gave His body and blood to the ministers, and said to them, Luke 22:40: Pray, and ye shall not enter into temptation. And he went with them, not to dance, but to prayer, not to worldly joy, but to the bloody sweat with which he sweated; and the greedy Judas ran for money, to betray his master. Also many blind men, like beasts, cruelly devour the body of the Son of God, running one to greed, another to fornication, another to gambling, another to dancing, another to hunting inaccessible to the priest; and thus those who should be the first to follow Christ are the first against Christ! Therefore the dear Savior, riding into Jerusalem on a donkey, began to first crack
whip of the priests for covetousness and for the dishonor of the house of God. And so he began to teach the priests and the teachers, when he was twelve years old, as this reading shows. And because the men went separately and the women separately both to and from the feasts religiously, and it was fitting for the children to go in both crowds, therefore Joseph thought that Jesus would be with his mother, and she thought that he would be with Joseph. And so they went without him the first day, and the next day not knowing where Jesus was, they sought him among their friends and acquaintances, not knowing that he remained in Jerusalem to teach the teachers in the temple. And after three days they found him in the temple, not in a tavern, nor at a dance, nor in any game, but in the temple, in a place of prayer and holy teaching established, among the masters, whom he listened to and questioned, that he might teach, and he then set the masters and priests a good example to the same. "And they were all afraid, seeing his wisdom and answers;" for as a wise judge he first listened to them, and then when they doubted, he questioned; nor did he question so much, but when they asked, he answered. And from this it is known that very now the masters, doctors, and other priests sin, who neither listen wisely,
Second Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 43
They neither ask nor answer, except by their own will and false witnesses, as those two old priests who condemned Susanna without guilt, so they condemn, and if any holy scripture is against their customs and will, they interpret it strangely; as that Matt. 10:9: "Do not acquire for yourselves gold and silver," and that Matt. 20:25: "The princes of the heathen rule, but you do not," and that Matt. 10:8: "Freely you have received, freely give." And our doctors did not want to answer and teach bachelors and students, nor do they pray for God, if they are under commandment to the Pope, as he commands in the bull,
They gave him help from the goods that God had lent to them! Further reading: "And his mother said to him: Son, why have you done this to us?" The father did not ask, because he believed that Christ was God, and was afraid to punish God; but the mother, out of ordinary grace, who does not fear grace, but does what is willing, asks the reasons: not why Christ so tormented and grieved them, but for what useful thing he did so; and says: "Your father and I have been looking for you with sorrow." And Jesus, confirming the questions of his mother, also honestly asks about their ignorance, saying: "Did you not know that I must be in my father's business?' Know this, first and foremost, than in the service and obedience of any creature. And why? Because for this he came into the world, to bear witness to the truth.
B. Mothers and fathers have this lesson, that they should not hinder their children from serving God; secondly, that when a child does something, they should know the reasons why he does it, and not immediately complain or get angry. And children have this lesson, that they should not scold or curse their mother and father; for then Christ humbly asked his mother and father, saying: "How is it that you sought me?" And everyone has a lesson, but especially
prelate, to value the spiritual benefit of the holy church more than any worldly causes, and to obey God more than any man. Even now, against the will of his father and mother, Jesus fulfilled the will of God the Father, and gave a teaching, that everyone, when he ever knew that God chose others than his father or mother, should fulfill the will of God. Even now, his father and mother wanted Jesus not to remain in the temple, and God the Father wanted him to remain in the temple; therefore Jesus said that he had to be in the temple to teach the masters, as his heavenly father had commanded him.
He preached. Against this holy teaching are people in general, and especially priests, who value human commandments more than divine commandments.
44 Reading 6.
live, and so they obey man more than God. And so they have led the people astray by obedience to the priests, that many say and preach that whatever the pope commands, the people must do or keep, as if the pope could not err; and they do not want to remember that many popes were heretics, and that one woman was pope for two years and three months, who was a native of Mainz and was called Agnes, and when she was pope, she was called Johannes; and then, going from St. Peter to the Lateran, she gave birth to a child. The devil put her in the pope's place and her friar put her in, saying that she was learned, and the Lord God permitted it for our benefit, so that we would not immediately consider someone who would hold the bishopric or the papacy a saint.
Then others say that even if a higher one, like a bishop or pope, commands something bad, the lower one should still obey: for he will not have sin, but the one who commands. This arrow is of the devil, which would lead everyone into his obedience, not thinking that he will be guilty, so he knows the person in sin. Therefore neither the one who commands something bad, nor the one who obeys, will be without sin; for the Savior says, Mt. 15:14: If the blind lead the blind, both will fall into the pit. And the Savior speaks of prelates who, for the sake of their own positions, transgressed the commandments of God.
Further reading: "And they understood not the word which he spake unto them." Mary and Joseph could not yet fully comprehend the mystery of God with their understanding; for as the interpretation says, the mighty God is made small, that he may grow among the little ones, and gradually he led them, that they might come to his mystery of truth; no wonder that the virgin Mary knew many things, and understood many of the words of Christ. Further reading: "And he went with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them." In Latin it is said that he descended with them, because Jerusalem is higher than Nazareth; but it can be spiritually
It is meant that his descent is his humiliation. Therefore the interpretation is faithful: "he descended" and humbled himself, and was subject to them. S. Bernard: "To them." Who to whom? God to men. And God was subject to man; therefore man is ashamed to be proud, for whom God is made humble. And so Jesus here fulfilled all justice, that is, perfect humility, by submitting himself to the lower in obedience; and this obedience, as S. Ambrose says, was not involuntary, but voluntary and gracious.
Sunday-first after the birth of Christ. 45
C. Here also Jesus taught children that they should not only obey their parents, but also honor them; for God says in the commandment, Exo. v. 20 k. 12 v.: "Honor your father and your mother." Honor, honoring them honestly; honor, need
to them, even though they are poor, giving; honor, in good things obeying them, as St. Paul says to the Colossians in 3 c. 20 v: "Children, obey your parents in all things!" understand in those which belong to internal honesty and to domestic affairs, and which are not against God. Therefore children are not to obey their parents in everything; for if the father or mother commands their daughter to take a husband, and she prefers to remain a virgin, then she is not obliged to obey
chati in that; also if he commands her to remain a virgin, and she prefers to have a husband, again she is not bound to do so. Likewise also about a boy; perhaps his father commands him to be a monk or a priest, and he means that that state does not suit him, he is not bound to obey the father in that. Nor the pope; again if the pope or father should command Peter to sell everything and give it to God, Peter is not bound to obey in that, although it is God's will, to sell everything and give it to the poor and follow Christ; but perhaps it does not suit Peter, therefore he is not bound under mortal sin to obey the father or the pope in that.
But perhaps he would say: Since it is God's counsel to do so, and God cannot counsel evil, just as He cannot go astray, how then does Peter or anyone else not sin, disobeying God's counsel? Here I say that he sins mundanely; for counsel does not bind under mortal sin like a commandment, but under mundane. Also, not every counsel of God is more profitable to everyone; for marriage is better suited to some than to remain unmarried, as the Lord God Himself has ordained that others should enter into marriage, and not remain so. Therefore a person should diligently weigh which state is better suited to him, and ask the Lord God to grant him that state. And for this we pray, saying, Matthew 6:10, Luke 11:2: Thy will be done! And how Jesus obeyed not his own will, but the will of God the Father, as he himself says in 6 ch. 38 v. S. John: that I came down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me. And to this he says today's reading: that "in those things which are my Father's I must be." And that it was also the will of the Father, that he should obey his father and mother after the heavenly Father, therefore he says: "and he was subject to them. And his mother kept
46 Reading 6.
"She pondered all these words, laying them up in her heart." For she received them gladly and heartily, and was enlightened in her mind by them, and then understood what Christ meant. Thus must a faithful soul do, who, though not bodily, yet spiritually gave birth to Jesus; for Jesus says, Matthew 10:50, Mark 3:35: "Whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven is my brother, and my sister, and my mother." Therefore says St. Augustine: "If Mary had not first spiritually conceived the Son of God, she would never have given birth to him in the flesh." Therefore it is very profitable for a faithful soul to keep the words of God, for thus will she be the mother of God, as Jesus said to the woman who praised him, saying, Luke 11:27-28: "Blessed is the womb that bore you, and "But blessed are those who hear the word of God and keep it." As if he were saying, "Woman! blessed is the womb that bore me; but he would not have been blessed because he bore me, if she had not kept the words of God, who carried me in her womb and nursed me at her breasts, of whom we now read: "And his mother kept all these words, pondering them in her heart."
Further reading: "And Jesus prospered in age," that he grew and advanced in years; "and in wisdom," by knowledge in addition to smell, so that he recognized with his bodily eyes something that he had not seen before, and also heard, and tasted, and touched; "and in grace," which he showed to the people; and also, as St. Ambrose says, he prospered in wisdom and grace, that he gradually showed his wisdom and grace. And St. Gregory says: He prospered others; that is, he brought benefit to other people by his wisdom and grace; and that gloriously "both before God and before men," so that God may be praised, and men may be taught and saved by His holy grace, who deigned to go with His father and mother to the temple, to be taught by the masters there, then to go home with His mother, and to be subject to His father Joseph and the Virgin Mary by grace, being the Son of God, the eternal God, blessed forever. Whose teaching deigned to be our salvation! Amen.
