Third Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 47
THIRD SUNDAY AFTER THE Nativity of Christ.
S. John in chapter 2, verses 1-11.
At that time, the wedding (marriage feast) became a
Cana of Galilee (that town in that region); and the mother of Jesus was there, and Jesus and his disciples were invited to the wedding. And when the wine ran out, the mother
Jesus said to her, "They have no wine." And Jesus said to her, "What is that to me and to you, woman? My hour has not yet come." His mother said to her servants, "Whatever happens to you,
do! And there were six waterpots of stone set there, after the manner of the Jews' purification, which they often washed, containing two or three measures each. Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water: and they filled them to the brim. And they drew them out, and drew them out, and bore them unto the master of the feast. And they bore them unto him. And when the master tasted
The ruler of the wedding feast called the bridegroom, and said to him, “Every man at first serves the good wine, and when people have drunk freely, then the inferior wine; but you have kept the good wine until now.” This beginning of miracles Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, going with his disciples, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
This miracle happened on the same day after the year on which Christ was baptized by John, at a wedding feast, which, as A. supposes, was the wedding of John, who was called to the apostleship by him, whose wife we ​​do not know, although some suppose that she was Mary Magdalene. And so after the third day from the calling of Philip and Nathanael, as it is written in 1 K. 44-52 v. S. John, in a town of Galilee called Cana, this miracle happened; and the mother of Jesus was there at the wedding feast, for she
48 Ctente 3
She was John's aunt, and so by nature she was obliged to be at the wedding; and Jesus, as a natural friend, being a common man, was also called with his disciples.
From this it is clear that marriage is worthy, and also the wedding; for the supreme truth, the Lord Jesus, would not have been at the wedding if there were an evil wedding in Him. Therefore, St. Bede, by saying that Jesus deigned to come to the wedding, confirms the faith of the faithful, in addition to the reading, and condemns the error of Tatian and Marchion and other heretics, who break up marriage; for if in an undefiled marriage and in the wedding there was justly preserved guilt, the Lord would not have not come to the wedding. But that marital abstinence is good, widow abstinence better, and perfect virginity best, he has proved that the state of virginity is the most worthy, that He deigned to be born of the Virgin Mary. Thus Bede wants. Then when the wine was not available, the mother of Jesus, being diligent, as if out of pity complained to her son, hoping that he would miraculously remedy the deficiency; and she said nicely and modestly: "They have no wine." And Jesus answered her: "What is that to me and to thee, woman?" As if he were to say, according to the interpretation of St. Augustine, that He did not take humanity from her, by which He might work all kinds of miracles; for He worked miracles besides the divinity, which She did not make. Therefore he says: "the hour is not yet come," in which He would suffer besides the humanity which He took from Her; therefore in the reading of St. John in 20 c. 15 v. and in this he calls her a woman, as St. Augustine does. But St. John Chrysostom thinks that the Virgin Mary, out of pity, desired that Christ should work a miracle before the time, without sinning by it; for she is modest, and if it were Christ's will, she asked for it. And because that miracle was the first, therefore He wanted it to be manifest, and so that the time for it would be worthy; Therefore, not in an accessible way, but seriously and to teach, he said: "The hour has not yet come," which would be suitable for that deed. Because neither he nor his mother had yet had the hour accessible to that miracle, he calls her a woman, as a stranger and not his own; for he had not from her the power to know the hour in which he was to perform the miracle, but that he should wait for the hours more accessible and more obvious to that miracle. Therefore, his mother did not put it in her mind as if he had driven away her request and not heard it, but that he had long delayed, in order to fulfill her request in his own time; for she knew with full faith that Christ is omnipotent and omniscient, and that all the things that he does, he does very rightly.
Third Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 49
Therefore, having entrusted in her mind the whole deed and the causes to him for the will of that deed, thinking that if he were worthy, then he would make up for the lack of wine, she said to the servants: "Whatever he tells you, do." If we, who are called servants of Christ, had obeyed her holy counsel, then we would not have committed fornication, nor committed any mortal sin; but we would have fully fulfilled the will of his holy commandment.
Further, the reading says that "there were six tubs," or vats, or basins; I do not know the specific name, because the Latins took the word y d r i a from the Greeks, and the word ydria means utensils prepared for water; and so those six utensils, whether tubs, vats, barrels, basins, buckets, bottles, or bowls, stood there according to Jewish custom. Which custom was established by the scribes, that they should often wash their hands when they touched anything even fairly clean, and for the utensils, that they should often wash them; as St. Mark writes in 7 c. 3-4 v. saying: The scribes and all the Jews, one often washes themselves, eat, holding the tradition of the elders; and they do not eat in the market unless they wash. And there are many other traditions which are established for them to keep; washing of cups, buckets, copper utensils, and beds. Thus dies S. Marek.
Further, when the reading says that "taking," that is, each of the vats or vats, "measures or measures two or three," I cannot explain these; for meterta is a Greek word, and in one country there are different measures and in another; and we in Bohemia do not agree on measures, but rather in one city in Prague there is one measure in the New Town and another in the Lesser Town. And it is not much use to us for salvation to know what the vats and measures were. "Jesus said to them: Fill the vats with water!" Then someone might ask why he did not create wine in the vats without water, or water in the vats? The answer is from Saint John Chrysostom, that so that the witnesses of the miracle would be servants; as when He raised Lazarus, John 11:39, He commanded the stone to be taken away, and everyone knows that it was as easy for Him to raise Lazarus without a stone as it was to raise him. "And they filled it up to the brim." These servants of the Virgin Mary and Christ obeyed: grant, Lord God, that we also do so. But many have sinned, who, contrary to the commandment of Christ, fill their bellies with gluttony, having their bellies for their gods,
50 Reading 7.
as St. Paul says in Philippians 3:19; and others fill themselves with water, with the desire of covetousness, which they never drink to their heart's content; for the more they drink, the more they thirst. For Solomon says in Ecclesiastes 5:10, that the covetous man is not filled
money, and Aristotle says that the demand for goods grows without end. And he says to them: "Take now and bring it to the ruler." That is, that the miracle may be announced in his power both by the servants and by the ruler of the wedding, who from the Greeks is called architriclinus, and was the one who announced the wedding; and besides the Jewish custom, some say that there was a Jewish priest, sent to the wedding, to teach the bridegroom and the bride how they should live together. - Further he says: "And they brought it." Up to that word everything is easy. "This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee." Then someone would say: But he did the first miracles when he brought three kings to him, when he taught the masters in the temple. One answer is that he reads, that "this first miracle did he in Cana of Galilee." The second answer is, that this miracle is the first and manifest from the beginning of his preaching, by which he declared or made known his glory, that is, that he is a mighty and glorious God. And because of this deed "his disciples believed in him;" they believed first, but this confirmed their faith.
B, That this reading is about a wedding, therefore it is read similarly to Shrovetide, because at that time people are most generally conceived and have weddings. Therefore it is useful for priests to preach to the people how they should conceive themselves, so that they may stand justly in marriage. And they should tell the people that marriage was first established for the sake of fruit; for God said to Noah and his sons, Gen. 9, 1: Increase and multiply and fill the earth. And therefore he gave Eve to Adam in paradise, Gen. 2, 22, that people might multiply from them; and thus marriage began in paradise and was established by God. Let each monk show as firm a foundation for his law as his holy marriage. The second is established for the warning against fornication, as St. Paul says, I Corinthians 7:2: Let every man have his own wife for fornication, and every woman her own husband. This St. Paul says, not commanding, but giving advice to those who and who do not want to remain in virgin or widowed purity. And understand when St. Paul says: Let every man have his own wife "for fornication," not that he may commit fornication with her, but that he may abstain from fornication, having his wife. And so the fruit and the warning of fornication are the two most
Third Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 51
The first cause in common marriage. Diem: "in common," because between Joseph and the Virgin Mary there was a marriage, not that he might have a child with her by deed, nor to warn them from fornication, but for other causes, which will be written about elsewhere. There are also other causes of marriage, such as: reconciliation of enemies, bringing people together, and so on about other causes.
Then the benefit or advantage of marriage is that if the spouses live together, then the Lord God will give good children and other things, and then the kingdom of heaven. Also in marriage there should be faith, fruit, and a sacred thing: faith, so that neither he nor she may commit adultery with another; the fruit, so that it may be brought up to the praise of God; a sacred thing, that is, the consent of a man with a woman means a holy thing. Which thing? This: that the Son of God Christ promised to himself
the holy church, which is the assembly of all those who are chosen for salvation; and this bride he so loved that he died for her on the cross, and he loved her properly, for salvation. And so husbands ought to love their wives. Therefore, the
c. S. Paul to the Ephesians in 5 k. 25-26 in: Husbands! love your wives, as Christ loved the church, and gave himself up for her, that he might enlighten her, having cleansed her with the washing of water in the word of life, that he might wash her with the washing of water of the Son of God, which water flowed from his side. Further, S. Paul says, Ephesians 5, 27: That he might present her to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that she should be holy and without blemish. Understand that Christ will have the church glorious to himself, both in soul and body, after the day of judgment, not having spot, that is, mortal sin, or wrinkle, that is, everyday sin, or any such thing, that is, no impurity of the flesh, or any blemish; and so that she may be holy and blameless. Further, St. Paul says, Ephesians 5:28: In the same way, husbands ought to love their wives. For this reason, know this, just as Christ also loves the church, for eternal salvation. Further, St. Paul says, Ephesians 5:28-
32: As his own bodies; for he that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as Christ the church: for we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and the two shall be one flesh. This is a great and holy thing, and I speak in Christ and in the holy church. All this St. Paul.
52 reading 7.
Hard speech is rude to the mind; but briefly understand that the permission of a man and a woman to marry in order to procreate means the permission of Christ with the holy church to a spiritual ordination. For a man with a woman begets physical children, but Christ with his wife begets spiritual children; and as Christ loves the church for purity and salvation, so the husband should love his wife and the wife his husband; and as Christ is one body with the holy church, and loves her as his own body, so the husband and his wife should be as one body, and should love one another. And further, when Paul says, Ephesians 5:30: "We are members of his body," this means the holy church, which is the body of Christ; understand: not that body which is in the person of Christ and crucified on the cross, but St. Paul calls the body of Christ the whole congregation of people who will be saved; and of this body every elect is a member, and is of that body. And when it says, "Therefore," that is, for marriage, "a man shall leave his father and mother," also the woman, and the man shall cleave to his wife, and the woman to her husband. "Leave," understand the dwelling, that he shall leave his father and mother, and the woman shall dwell with the man, and the man with the woman; "and they shall be two in one flesh," that is, for one man; and this is a sign of the great holy thing, that is, the consent of Christ with the holy church. Of this I have written here in the books on the commandments and in the books on the holy church.
D. Know also that marriage is the regular consent of a man and a woman, indissoluble until death. When we say: "regular," we mean that there should be freedom on both sides, that both the man and the woman should be free, not bound by any vow to another woman, nor she to another, nor to God; also "regular," that they should not be related by nature to each other in the knee, in the family, I mean, fourth, nor related to each other, as they are: bride, groom, son-in-law, godmother, godfather, and so on about others. And when we say: "consent," we know that marriage is made by consent on both sides, so that when a woman and a man consent without deceit to live together as husband and wife, then the bond of both is indissoluble in marriage; as the scripture says, Mt. 19:6: What God has bound or joined together, let no man put asunder. And I say: consent "without deceit," because sometimes a man gives his wife consent with his mouth deceitfully, wanting her to consent to him in deed, and he thinks that she will not accept it, and she consents, thinking that he would promise without deceit: there is no marriage, and he could take another; but if he promised her under oath, then he will be a perjurer; but she has no other right to take until his death, because she does not know whether he promised her rightly or wrongly, nor
The third Sunday after the birth of Christ. 53
he should believe him if he says that he did not intend to take her. And the same trick is also used by the woman. And so the consent of both parties, free and without deceit, makes a marriage, even if they have never slept together; but rude people think that one of them would take her as a marriage! And the consent is asserted by words from both parties, that the man says: I take you to be my wife. And she: And I take you to be my husband. Or if they cannot say it like that, but say: I promise to take you to be my wife, and I promise not to take another. And she also says again. Who can separate them differently, when the consent is a true intention and the confirmation by words? And that consent is indivisible until the death of one of them, so that no one can take it away from it, nor can anyone separate them, so that they are not husbands; Although sometimes they are separated because of adultery, so that they do not live together, they are not separated in marriage.
Also know that the husband and wife in fact recognize each other in four ways: first, directly for the sake of the fruit. And here there is no need for confession, although according to the words of St. Augustine, this act does not happen without a small sin of the flesh; for he says that every man in his wickedness at that time is tempted, and thus forgets the Lord God. But perhaps you say: If this is so, then it is not fitting for the husband and wife to ever recognize each other bodily for the sake of the fruit? Then I say that by the same reason he would prove that it would not be fitting for us to say the prayer "Our Father;" because none of us does not say it, he would not sin habitually, because either he thinks somewhere else, or does not say it with great force, and especially because he does not say it so well. as Christ said it well; and so each of us has a deficiency in his prayer. I know myself - do as you wish; and I do not know yet whether I have grown a single spine precious to God, as long as I live! And the scripture is a witness, which says, Ecc1. 9, 1: No one knows whether he is worthy of mercy or wrath. And St. John in his epistle says, I, 1, 8: If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
F. But know that venial sin, which is called venial because we have it every day until death, because we do not love God fully with all our strength, does not drive away the Holy Spirit from us, nor does it make our deeds not precious to God; therefore if a man continues with this sin, without having a mortal, then God is pleased and has a reward. Likewise, married couples, when they know each other by the fruit.
54 Reading 7.
The second is recognized by the husbands for the sake of warning against sin, so that the husband fears lest he fall into fornication, and commits it. This again happens without mortal sin and there is no need for confession. The third is committed out of obedience to the law, paying the debt, as St. Paul commands to the Corinthians in 1 Epistle in 7 ch. 3-4 v. saying: The husband should pay the debt to his wife, and the wife to her husband because the husband no longer has power over his own body, but the wife has power over his body; likewise the wife does not have power over anything but her body. Therefore, if the husband reprimands the wife, she, out of obedience to the law, although she would like to be free from it, calls upon him, pays the debt and fulfills the law; the husband also must fulfill the third. St. Paul clearly states this. Then the fourth is known, and this in the second knowledge can be understood, when the wife, fearing that the husband will not look elsewhere, wanting to keep him in marriage, also hastens to know him; and if he does the same, she fears that the lustful wife will not look elsewhere. This knowledge is called gracious, that is, because it comes from love. Then the fifth is known by the husbands from great lust, and so they sin mortally; as seven men knew or wanted to know Sarah, that one after the other took her as his wife, and each
whom the devil strangled the first night. This is written about in Tobit in verses 6 and 7. If the devil were to strangle all those who are now considered beautiful or lustful, perhaps there would be few wives left - but fewer
husbands! for seven of them perished, and one good Sarah remained. I have delayed this, because I know the great need of it; and I had to write thus out of love, leaving other senses in the reading.
