Fifth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 63
SUNDAYCLOSEDAFTER THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.
S. Matt. in chapter 8, verses 23-27.
At that time, when Jesus got into the boat, his disciples followed him. And there arose a great tempest in the sea, so that the boat was covered with the waves; and he was saved. And his disciples came to him, and rebuked him, saying, Lord, save us, we perish. And he said unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm in the sea. And the men marveled, saying, Who then is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?
This holy reading next to the number is quite easy for the mind, but it contains a teaching for the holy church, how it is to serve the Lord God. And why Christ entered the boat, there are many reasons: first, that in his time he might rest with his disciples beside the body; second, to teach us to pray openly, when there is worthy rest, and that we may be religious, and taking instruction, that we may then benefit others; and third, a teaching, that we may flee flattery, as Christ fled when they wanted to choose him to be king, in 6 c. 15 v. S. John. And then he entered the boat; not in vain did the storm of the sea arise when Christ slept; but God arranged it Christ, that the disciples might be confirmed in faith that he was God, seeing a miracle of his power; second, that his true humanity might be proved, he slept in the boat; and thirdly, to teach us to pray in need; and fourthly, the demonstration by the disciples that, like them, we too are afraid because of lack of faith. Therefore, this is the special reason why our dear Christ sleeps, and from that punishment we; for to the disciples, when they woke him up and said: "Lord! save us," that is, preserve, "hynemet," he said excellently: "Why are you fearful, of little faith?" For some of them were of little faith, because they took him only for a man, or very weakly believed that he was a god; for if they had fully believed that he was true god, then they would know that he can work wonders just as well when he sleeps as when he is not; for the deity, who never sleeps, works wonders, but not humanity,
64 Cteníe 9.
who sometimes sleeps and sometimes does not sleep. And from this we understand that scripture of David, Psalm 44, 24: Arise) why sleepest thou, O Lord? For God sleepeth not with men, but for the lack of faith which they have; and as the scourge which he sleepeth always holdeth over his faithful to chastise them, so also the helping hand which he sleepeth always holdeth for his hopeful ones.
And from this you have that the apostles should not have feared so much, being with Christ, knowing that no creature can do anything against his full will, nor can he deny the help of those who fully trust in him; for St. Paul says, 2 Timothy 2:13: God is faithful, he cannot deny himself. Also from this you have that it is impossible for a man to sin, one of the lack of faith, when he sins mortally; for if he sins thus, then either he has no faith, or he is not in faith.
vrtlá. Therefore St. James the Apostle says well, James 2, 26, that faith without works is dead. For if a man love not God above all things, he hath immediately put faith to death; and since whenever he sins mortally, at that time he loveth not God, it is evident that when he sins mortally, that he is already deficient in his faith. Again, if men fully believed that God seeth all sins, and that without fail he will avenge every one, and that they had eternal torment before their eyes, then they would not so readily sin; but because they are moved by unbelief, nor say: Perhaps God will not so avenge him), therefore by that hope and doubt they are more ready to sin. Therefore, we need to say with his apostles piously to the Savior, in 17 c. 5 v. S. Luke: "Lord! increase our faith;" that is, give us full faith, without doubting and without wavering.
In which confusion are many in this time of Antichrist, and especially priests, who are not allowed to stand up for the truth of God bravely, fearing lest God forget them; and the laity also, having care lest they have nothing to eat for tomorrow, if for the defense of God's truth their food be taken away; and others, because of the condemnation of bodily food, like many servants, are not allowed to hear the words of God. To all such the Savior says, Matt. 6, 25 and 34: Do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat; nor about your body, what you will put on! And further he says: Do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. From this speech you further understand that the priests and scribes, having great care for salaries and physical needs, and setting aside salaries for themselves, are of little faith; for they do not trust in the gracious Savior to feed them.
Fifth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 65
without that intervention, as the disciples, filled with the Holy Spirit, believed.
Then the spiritual lesson in the reading is that we should follow Jesus and sail across the sea of ​​this poor world. The ship should be a firm hope that we will sail through the storms and the sea; storms are great temptations; and the sea, which sometimes rises and sometimes falls, is the honor of this world, by which a person is sometimes exalted and sometimes humbled. Therefore, it is necessary to be firmly
Let us sit in the hope of God, and if despair or idleness should be poured out, let us defend ourselves and call upon the dear Lord, that He may not let the storm defeat us. For we need not sleep much among the sea breezes, which are sweet temptations, such as fornication and other carnal pleasures, and for elevation in the world, to which men are in great haste, not knowing that the higher they climb, the lower they fall. From this fall, dear Christ, please help us!
