1952  
COMENIUS EVANGELICAL FACULTY OF THEOLOGY IN PRAGUE
5  
The Comenius Faculty is launching with this volume a comprehensive committee on the literary works of M. J. Hus, estimated at about 8-10 volumes, which would replace a similar committee by V. Flajšhans and Milan Svoboda, published less than half a century ago and long since disappeared from the market. Like this committee, ours does not want to present Hus's writings in a critical edition and thereby compete with the task and program of the Commission for the Publication of Sources on the History of the Religious Movement in Bohemia in the 14th and 15th Centuries at the Czech Academy, which published four volumes of Hus's works in 1903-20 with the work of V. Flajšhans and V. Novotný. Our intention is to make the Master's main writings available to the general public, i.e. Latin in translation, Czech in transcription; Here we will deviate from Flajšhans, who translated Hus into modern Czech, and we will stick to the model of K. J. Erben, whose edition of the Czech writings of Hus will be our basis. A critical edition of these writings is even more distant today than in the 1960s, due to the large number and diversity of manuscripts in which they have been preserved. Erben therefore took the best manuscript as a basis and ignored the differences in the manuscripts of others, and the text he constructed is essentially satisfactory to this day. Our edition thus renews the attempt of the young F. Žilka, later a professor and the pride of our faculty, his adaptation of Erben's edition from 1902. The publisher himself discusses the details of our adaptation in the afterword.
First of all, we intend to publish Czech writings, for which the need for publication seems most urgent. There are far fewer of them compared to Latin writings, which are mostly older, but they have a great advantage over them. Whereas Latin writings are written for the clergy or intelligentsia, who have gone through university, M. Jan wrote Czech writings for the people. They were written in large numbers in exile, outside Prague, and Hus wrote them just as much for his new rural listeners as for his Bethlehem listeners, from whom he was torn away, but with whom he remained intimately connected until the tragic end of his life. He remembered them gratefully even in the face of death and had them greeted as his doctors, those tailors, shoemakers and scribes, from whom he did not hesitate to learn no less than from his university teachers. The Czech writings also establish Hus's fame as a classic not only of the Czech Reformation, but also of our literature. They therefore already have a great tradition in the history of our nation and have exercised a powerful influence on all its generations. Let us recall a testimony that, above many others, captures the moral force with which they are charged, and which has a weight that is quite extraordinary, already due to the personality of its originator. It is Z. N e j e d 1 y. "As a boy," he confessed in 1919 in the essay Hus and His Truth, "I received Erben's edition of Hus's writings into my hands, and not only did I read them immediately and with pleasure, but they have since become my dearest book, perhaps the one with which I have never parted. At every time of my life I have read these three volumes as if they were my best gospel, in which I have in all respects
The questions that had once troubled me found an answer, and an answer that was liberating. From them I learned to honor the duties of life, to understand the meaning of the struggle for truth, to recognize the moral duties of man, and so much more.
another, what makes a person a person. But even though I suffered from quite special, contemporary doubts, I always found the best support in Hus's writings. And so, even in the past years of the deepest oppression and humiliation, I opened these books again and found in them places that seemed to have been written directly today, for our people today." So much for Z. Nejedlý.
We begin the collection with the Czech Postilion, Hus's most mature writing, as acknowledged by the strict Catholic judge M. Jan Jan Sedlák himself. It is his last great work, written in exile at Kozí Castle on October 27, 1413, and it is the conclusion of his many years of preaching work, which culminates in this work. For twelve years of his work in Prague, from his ordination as a priest in the summer of 1400 until his departure into exile in October 1412, Hus was a zealous preacher who also published his sermons to the public. In the very first year of his preaching, he collected the harvest of that year into a collection, and when he reached the pulpit in Bethlehem in March 1402, he probably did so almost every year thereafter; from the last five years we have such a postilion from each year, from the previous six at least three so far, and in addition to that, a special collection of holiday sermons. Over the years, postilions gain in scope and value. Of these, the great Lent from 1410-1411, the so-called Bethlehem Sermons, stands out in particular. This Lent, written like all the others in Latin, was, it seems, Hus's main tool when, sometime in the summer of 1413, perhaps still in Prague, where he was delayed until July by the court's attempts to reconcile him with the church, he decided to compile those Latin sermons in our Lent. He was probably then quite distracted from this work by his preaching activities, which he carried out in the wider vicinity of his refuge, the Kozí Castle near what later became Tábor. Only autumn allowed him to complete the work.
Huss stuck to his originals verbatim in places, especially when he did not have enough time, but the Czech Lent is of a very different nature. Latin Lents usually present mere sketches or outlines and are written in an almost stenographic style. They are written by priests and we often find the instruction: "Explain as you can!" Our Lent is written for the people. Therefore, it adds what Huss mostly suppressed in his Latin collections, personal reflections and memories. They are often defensive but also offensive in nature. This is a reflection of the struggle from which the work grew and which reached its peak at the time it was written. Huss has been an outlaw since October 1412. He was solemnly excommunicated from the church and was cursed by it in 1410, but the protection of King Wenceslas IV meant that this great blow remained on paper. However, Huss's statement against the king
The thwarting of the indulgence in June 1412 angered the capricious monarch so much that he turned away from Hus forever and he had no choice but to leave.
Prague. Street riots broke out there, because the church could now proceed to carry out the curse to its ultimate consequences, stopping all religious services, funerals and baptisms in the capital. Hus himself was threatened with death, and the court, as he himself recalls in Postila, pressured him to leave Prague. He then returned to Bethlehem about twice more, but only on a whim, and in July he left the city permanently. Hus's party already had its martyrs, not only in Prague, where during the storm against indulgences three young followers of the Master fell at the hands of the executioner, but also in Moravia. It is certainly not surprising that the memories of all this are colored by bitterness and indignation in the Postila and that among the calm interpretations of biblical texts we read again and again defenses of one's own course of action against opponents, the sentiment being the now deceased Archbishop Zbyněk of Hazmburk, the doctors of the theological faculty headed by Hus's old teacher Stanislav of Znojmo or the popes, yes, that we even read here once a several-page defense of the curse. The theologian here gives way to the warrior and the Postila gives us the opportunity to imagine Hus in the pulpit, how he actually preached and fought. He fights not only for himself, but also for his dear Bethlehem, when the church is afflicted by a curse, that spiritual songs are sung there during church services. All this gives the Postila a liveliness that not one of Hus's numerous Latin postilas achieves.
But this is not the only advantage of the work: No less important is how nicely it reflects Hus's corrective program in its final form and maturity. Hus adopted this program essentially from the older generation of preachers, from the school of Milič, but he gave it both a more scientific armament and variously elaborated it. This armament was mostly taken from his leading teacher, John Wycliffe. He carried out the elaboration mainly by returning to the Father of our Reformation himself, Milič, especially to his uncompromising ideal of the poverty of the clergy after the model of Christ. Whereas Milič mostly stopped at proclaiming this ideal with his own life, Hus made it the norm not only for himself but also for all the clergy and, like Wycliffe, declared deviation from this norm to be sacrilege and thus heresy. According to Hus, fees for administering the sacraments (and at that time there was also a fee for confession) are sacrilege and all the property of the church belongs to the poor; priests are entitled only to food and clothing. In this way, the Bethlehem preacher undermined all the economic power of the priesthood, supported by the enormous earthly property, which made the Church the largest landowner in the country, and he justified what the Hussite revolution would accomplish: the expropriation of church property and thus a far-reaching social revolution. Or [these properties, that] poison which, according to medieval legend, was poured into the Church when it received property from the Emperor Constantine, and poisoned all of Christendom with strife and disputes between priests, sacrilege, pride and fornication. And therefore Hus does not hesitate to repeat after Wycliffe: "Dogs are fighting over a scythe, take a bone and they will stop!" This was a call to the state, a call to revolution. The Church responded to it
by developing efforts to get the accursed heretic into her hands and render him harmless forever.
When he had reached almost half of the work, Hus did not yet believe that his exile would be the final solution to his resistance against the Church. If it were God's will, he says (p. 198), he would dare to disregard the curse pronounced on him when the time came, and would preach again; by this he probably means the sermon in Bethlehem. A little later (p. 211) he gives expression to this hope in the famous motto of Scripture, which would become the motto of the revolution: Truth prevails over all things and endures forever. This hope did not leave him, even when he finished the work at the end of October 1413. Four days later, King Sigismund in Italy negotiated with Pope John XXIII to convene the Council of Constance, and this caused a fateful turn in the case of Hus. With the general council of the church a judge appeared on the scene far more powerful than the pope, for he was apparently completely impartial, and Huss was quickly deprived of any opportunity to rebel against him, as he had rebelled against obeying the pope's command. All Europe was now stirred to compel the surrender of Huss to the council's trial. Not even a year had passed since the writing of the Postilium in the quiet castle of Kozim, and M. John was on his way to Constance, on a journey from which there was no return.
F. M. Bartos.
The reader can find information about the preservation, editions, and fate of the Postilla, as well as the main details about the literature devoted to it, in the notes section of our edition at the end.
