BY POST.
Interpretation of the Sunday readings.
The merciful Savior, the Lord Almighty, the Son of God, Jesus Christ, true God and true man, came into the world to bear witness to the truth, to preach the kingdom of heaven, to find the lost sheep, and to show them the way to eternal joy by word and deed, in this he fully fulfilled the will of his Father, the Lord God. The merciful Savior in humility and meekness and poverty, being rejected by proud people and by the wise of this world, and especially by the bishops, by the teachers, by the priests and by the scribes, who always opposed him, worked with the people in preaching until death; and this he did out of great mercy. Therefore, St. Matt. writes in the 9th chapter: 36-38 v. saying: When Jesus saw the multitudes, he had compassion on them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd. Therefore he said to his disciples: The harvest truly is plentiful, but the laborers are few; therefore pray the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest. That is: there are many people who would like to hear the word of God, and like wheat they are fit for the barn of the kingdom of Christ; but there are few laborers, know that there are few faithful preachers who, out of love for the praise of God, for the sake of humanity, and for their own salvation, work with the people of God. Therefore the Savior says: Pray the Lord of the harvest, that is, God, who is the Lord of the whole world, to send out faithful laborers into his harvest. This word St. Gregory interprets as "the harvest is plentiful and the laborers are few," saying, In. om.: We cannot speak of this without great sorrow, for though there are those who would like to hear good things, there are not those who would speak. The world is filled with priests, and yet in God's harvest very few workers are found; for we accept the priestly office, but we do not fulfill the work of the office. But heed, my brethren! heed what the Lord says: Pray the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest! Pray for us, that we may prepare useful things for you, that the tongue may not cease from admonition; and since we have come instead of preaching, that our silence may not condemn us before the just judges. That is St. Gregory. Whose speech, but first of all my Savior, I esteem, so that of the priestly office
12  
He did not abandon me, he did not waste time, I have decided, for the praise of God, for the salvation of the faithful Czechs, who desire to know and fulfill the will of God, to briefly explain everything we read on Sundays with God's help, asking that those who will read or hear them be saved, warn themselves of sins beforehand, love God above all things, hold on to grace together, prosper in virtues, and pray to the Lord God for me, a sinner.
And since they do not generally have readings written in Czech, and the interpretation is not so soon accepted without foundation, therefore I always want to set the reading first and then the interpretation, so that the word of our Savior will always be the most exalted, and so it will be announced to the faithful for salvation; for whoever hears them in grace until death, they will be saved and here they are blessed, as the Savior himself says in Luke 11:28: Blessed are those who hear the word of God and keep it. Considering this, we should diligently, gladly, bravely and cheerfully listen to the words of our gracious Savior, tell and preach them to others, diligently bring them to reason, and next to other scriptures interpret others, as the saints interpret them by the gift of God. And I intend, as I can, to explain the reading to the understanding as easily as possible, although not, of course, in the same way as I preach.
