70 Reading 11.
SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.S. Matt. in chapter 13, verses 24-30.
V ten time river J. at s. parablethis: SimilarThe kingdom is madeheavenlyto a person,who sent forth goodseedthatin your field(or ontheir role. And when they areburnPeople, the enemy has comehis, and he sucked the cockroachamong the wheat, and he went away.And whenwill increasezelina (herba t. zelina, or inthisreadingherbswheat seeding andbenefit, thenwill show itselfi he/she is cuddling.And the servants approachedhospogifts, they said to him: Lord!howeverhe sucked good semenon the polyyours, and from wherehas(t. understand] did you see?I insteadthem: Enemyman thatdid. 1 thing his servants said to him: If you want, we will go (t.let's go]i we will tear out(I will spit it outor chooseher. And things: Nothing [i.e. don't go]!or perhapstearing[cuckoo], youthey toreby s with him wheat;leave bothgrows up toharvest,and in harvest timewomen:Pull out first.he/she is cuddling.and bind them in bundles to burn, but gather the wheat(neb Gather it into my barn.
When the gracious Savior had spoken this word, his disciples, not understanding, as St. Matthew did, came to him, saying: Explain to us the parable of the tares and the field. And he answered and said: He who sows the good seed is the Son of Man, and the field or the field is the world. The good seed are the sons of the kingdom, and the tares are the sons of the wicked one, and the enemy that sowed them is the devil; and the harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are the angels. Therefore as the tares are gathered and burned with fire, so shall it be at the end of the world: the Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Thus Christ himself has interpreted his words, which no one can improve; therefore, if there were no other interpretation, the faithful soul, understanding this, would have something to ponder and weigh diligently. For therefore Christ said before this reading, Matthew 13:9: He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Seventh Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 71
But since Christ did not explain what the kingdom of heaven is, therefore know that the kingdom of heaven in the parable is himself; for after he says: "He who sows the seed is the son of man," and at the beginning of the reading he says that "the kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field," then he himself means the seed in that parable. And so he sowed good seed in the world, for he created all good things, he created man Adam and Eve without sin. And he did not come and sowed in them the tares of disobedience, but of the first unbelief; for Eve did not believe God that she would die if she ate of the forbidden tree; therefore she said, doubting in the word of God: Shall we die? Therefore, when Christ says that the devil sucked the sons of evil, understand that he did not create them, but that he made them evil by his guidance;
B. and thus sowing unbelief, errors, and all kinds of sins among them, he made them tares.
Then for future explanations, that often in the reading there is a mention of the kingdom of heaven, and in one reading it means one thing, and in another another, therefore know that the kingdom of heaven, as the word is pronounced, means the congregation of the saints who are in heaven with God, over whom God is king; being with whom, they enjoy the goods of heaven, that is, the joys that they have from his knowledge. And in this sense people generally take the kingdom to mean when they hear, yes they name the kingdom; and so can be understood in the prayer Matt. 6, 10, when we say: Thy kingdom come, that is: be filled with the congregation of the elect, who are to be with thee in heaven. Also when a man said, sitting with Christ at dinner, Luke. 14, 15: Blessed is he who shall eat bread in the kingdom of God, that is, he meant, who after death shall be filled in heaven.
Then secondly, the kingdom of heaven in Scripture means Christ, as in 17 c. 20-21 v. S. Luke: When Jesus was asked by the scribes when the kingdom of God would come, he answered them and said: Behold, the kingdom of God is among you. Here, the interpretation is,. the kingdom of God is called; as if he were saying: You ask, when will the kingdom of heaven come to those who are faithful? And I am among you, who will give the kingdom to my faithful, and you do not know me.
Thirdly, the kingdom of heaven here means the church, that is, the Christian congregation; as in that reading, Matt. 13:41: The Son of Man will send
72 Reading 11.
And to this word is the word of St. Gregory, who says: It should be known that often in the Holy Scripture the kingdom of heaven of the present time the church speaks, of which in another place the Lord says: "The Lord will send his angels, and they will take out of his kingdom all the things that offend." For in that kingdom of blessedness, in which there is supreme peace, there will be no things that offend that would be taken away. That is St. Gregory.
Fourthly, the kingdom of heaven means the place of the saints in heaven; as in 20 ch. 21 v. S. Mat. the mother of the sons of Zebedee besought Christ, saying: Command that this woman may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left, in thy kingdom. Now you know that the kingdom of Christ means the place where he sits with his saints.
Fifthly, the kingdom of heaven means the Holy Scripture, as in 21 c. 43 v. S. Mat. die Christ to the priests and scribes: "The kingdom of heaven shall be taken from you," that is, the writing of the law, "and shall be given to a people making atonement," that is, to good Christianity, which after
He lives the scriptures. And in 23 c. 13 v. S. Mat. Christ says: "Woe to you, teachers and scribes and hypocrites! for you shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; you yourselves do not go in, and those who are entering have been blocked.
"What is this: you close the kingdom of heaven before men?" St. John Chrysostom says that the scriptures, which show the kingdom of heaven; the gates of that kingdom are of the intellect, and those intellects are closed by the masters, scribes, and hypocrites before men, preventing the ignorant from understanding the scriptures, and they themselves do not enter the scriptures with the true intellect. Therefore, they greatly dislike to see that worldly men know the scriptures, and they prevent them, as Christ says now, from entering, that is, from reading, and so from understanding, and especially so that men do not understand how they are to be alive; secondly, so that they do not rebuke their sins; and thirdly, so that they do not mislead them in preaching, and that they must learn more diligently; and fourthly, so that they think that they are not so precious from the worldly. But Christ gave them blessing for it, saying: Woe to you! And when Christ says: "Woe," here for mortal sin he shows eternal damnation; for woe to him who falls into it.
Seventh Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 73
Also doctors, masters, priests, scribes and hypocrites, although others have the keys of the kingdom, yet they do not want to open it to them, and worse, they hinder it; Therefore Christ says to them in greeting in 11 c. 52 v. S. Luke: "Woe to you, you who have taken away the keys of knowledge! ' that is, know the scripture; "you yourselves did not enter, and those who were entering you hindered." And these words of Christ explain his first speech, that what he said before: "you close the kingdom," now he says: "you close the scripture, he took away the key," that is, know the meaning of the scripture. And there are now many who, knowing the scripture, do not want to live beside it, nor teach others; and even if someone wants to teach, he hinders. Now, for the understanding of Christ, remember the reading, whoever wants to understand, where in the reading the kingdom of heaven means what, or you will not understand otherwise. And this reading says: "The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field," that is, like Christ, the Son of man, to the man who sowed good seed, as to him who sowed wheat in his field: the farmer of wheat in his field, and the Son of Man, Christ, of good people in his church; for the field signifies the world, as Christ explained, and the world signifies the congregation of men, as there in 1 K. 10 v. S. John: The world knew him not, that is: the congregation of evil men did not know Christ the true faith. Then the seed is the word of God, faith, which is the good seed, because it makes the sons of God. And this seed Christ sowed in the field of the holy church so that at first the people were a good land; for they were created by God without sin, but being defiled by sin, the land was corrupted by thorns and thistles; but by the grace of Christ, by faith, the sons of God are made. And so Christ says: "The seed are the sons of the kingdom," that is: they are my sons, who are to to me and to salvation belong through faith and love.
"And while men slept," that is, when the prelates of the Church and the priests were lazy, not guarding the fields of Christ, as St. Augustine says; and also when other men slept, that is, not guarding their salvation, "his enemy came," Christ says: the devil, who from the creation of man, out of his envy has always been an enemy of man. That enemy the devil, whom Christ calls man, sucked in the first cobwebs, when in the pure earth, in Adam and Eve, taught by faith from God, he sucked in the lie, as the scripture of Genesis says in the first books in 3 c. 4 v., saying that they would not die; and this he did cleverly, beginning
74 reading 11.
from the woman, when Adam was not with her, as evil men do when a man is not with a woman. He also asked her, that he might know whether she was inclined to consent; and meaning in the answer, and saying: "Let us not die," immediately, like the first liar, or rather a lie contrary to the truth of Christ, he said: "You shall not die." And so he sucked the cocklebur, as the reading says, "and departed." As St. Bede says, that often an old enemy, when he has overcome a man by temptation, departs for a time: not in order to put an end to his malice, but in order to return soon afterwards, to tempt him more easily. And so sometimes he finds a man in sin, having as it were a certain one in his power, as a fisherman a fish on a hook or on a line, looks for another; and sometimes he tempts a man at one time, cannot overpower him, and departs, so that afterwards, when he is not
He is alert, he is quick to speak; as the reading says: "while men slept," know that, not alerting himself, he comes and tries, and sows tares. "And when the herb grows and brings forth fruit, then the tares also appear;" that is, when faith sown by the devil comes forth and brings forth fruit, that is, a good deed in itself: as when a man fasts, does alms, prays, and consciously stands in mortal sin. "The servants of the householder came," that is, the saints and the present faithful, going with their own desires, who signify how much tares are sown by the devil in the wheat, "they said," like wild boars: "But you sowed good seed in your field, and from where you got it, you know and understand, and many tares— and they further said: "If you want, we will pull it up."
E. The prelates of today hold to this word very closely, and not knowing how to distinguish between the tares and the wheat, which is better, they even tear the wheat more than the tares, obtusely more truth than unrighteousness, and taking truth for a lie, and again a lie for truth, so that the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled upon them. in 5 c. 20 v. about them: Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil! And other blind men say: it does no harm, but it is good, to destroy many good people with one evil one! As I have heard from them, they even give an example that for one ton of evil shekels they burn many other good ones for someone, and also make cloth; and they have already clearly confirmed this, having obtained a bull from Pope John XXIII, in which he clearly commands that both the bad and good books of Master John Wycliffe be burned, because they are greatly offended that they are written in them about their sacrilege, pride, fornication, and avarice; and they are most angry that he calls them almsmen,
Seventh Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 75
and that they should not rule like worldly lords; and also because he writes that when priests are badly off and do not want to remain wicked, then the worldly order and good intention, so that they have nothing to sin, can take away their goods, and also not give them tithes. And these words were condemned by some doctors with canons, with parish priests, and with monks near Prague in the town hall, in German called the Rathaus; but many masters, and almost the greater part of them, and the community of bachelors and students, did not accede to this condemnation, but rather the masters stood in the common school in the college, and they inferred in writing that those doctors with their company had defamed the truth, and they called those doctors to the school to prove in writing; and they did not want to, or they did not dare, not having writings with which they could bring their condemnation. And the origin of all this was Štěpán Páleč, that doctor, sometimes when the truth is sweet
F. val, my faithful and dear friend, and the other Stanislav; and the hundred rose up because we did not want to consent to the papal bull, on which he put the cross, that is, the power that whoever wants, the bull priests, nuns, and monks, prepare for the destruction of King Ladislaus of Naples, and all who are under his power and hold with him; and in that bull he condemned him to the fourth generation, and many other things, and gives forgiveness of sins and torments to whoever does it, or gives money. And the merciful savior gave knowledge to many masters, priests and seculars, that they did not consent to this for many things; and others laid down their necks for it, because they protested against the preachers, when they preached that the Pope is an earthly god, and can grant forgiveness of sins and torments to whomever he wishes, and that he must fight with an iron sword, like a secular king; and of these Martin, Jan and Stašek are beheaded, and in the name of God they are laid at Bethlehem, and others are then arrested, tortured and imprisoned.
I write this as a faithful chronicle, so that our descendants, if it happens, will know that others have boldly sat down to death before them. And it fits well with this reading that the householder forbade the servants not to pull up the tares, lest, while they were pulling up the tares, they should not pull up the wheat with them; for the reading goes that the householder said to them: "Do not pull up the tares, lest while you are pulling up the tares, you should also pull up the wheat with them, but let both grow until the harvest." This they do not do, but they pull up the wheat and let the tares grow; for the devil has almost sucked liars out of the indulgences everywhere, and those are greatly deceived.
76 Reading 11.
The priests and the priests defend others, and the doctors and the others are silent, and are not allowed to open their mouths against the devil's cockroaches. And so that people are dead, some through laziness, others through fear, and still others through cunning, because man has not sown many cockroaches in the wheat; the devil has sown cockroaches especially because now the prelates and the doctors do not want the reading of the Holy Scripture to judge the truth, but for themselves to judge: just as the bishops, masters, priests and scribes have condemned Christ by false testimony. And so with their shameful institutions they judge and condemn the faithful priest who preaches against their sacrilege and against other evils. However, they should know that since the Virgin Mary, and thus the entire kingdom of heaven, is this advice: "Whatever Jesus tells you, do it," and Jesus says, Matthew 10:7-9, that they should be warned not to take gold and silver for themselves, not to give freely, not to commit fornication; and now he says, to let both grow until the harvest, so that out of their foolishness, and perhaps others out of malice, they may not destroy the wheat with the tares, i.e. the good with the bad; for
He himself, who cannot be deceived, will command his angels on the day of judgment, as a righteous judge, to bind the tares in bundles. The wicked will be bound hand and foot, and thrown into outer darkness; but the wheat, that is, all the elect, will be gathered into the barn of heavenly joy.
And here they mean that as the tares are in some way advantageous to the wheat, because they are joined together with the stalks, that they may stand better against the wind, so that they do not shake it, as if they were shaking if the tares were not there; and in the beginning the tares are somewhat similar to the wheat, and the pulling out of the tares would be harmful if they were pulled out and the wheat were crushed: so the wicked, when they are scattered among the good, are somewhat of a help to the good with great reward, and are as it were to them for habituation in spiritual warfare. For if no wicked man hindered the good, the good would have no temptation, and so no great fight, therefore he would have no great reward; but that the wicked is given to the good for temptation, that by persevering against his wickedness they may have great reward; therefore the pulling out of all the wicked, if it were now, would be a great injury to the good. Therefore the supreme lord and the wisest son: "Let both grow until the harvest."
G. But sometimes it is fitting for the worldly to weave the tares, following the counsel of the Scriptures of God, but not following all their ordinances; and they may do so at other times, but with the great counsel of wise men in the Scriptures of God.
Seventh Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 77
Hem and out of grace, and with diligence, that they should not crush the wheat, nor uproot it. But to Peter in 18 c. 17 v. S. Mat. the Savior commanded a sinful man after the third admonition, when his sin was manifest and the community did not want to obey, to be warned of him as a pagan and a manifest sinner; but He did not command him to be killed: and then the present deputies of Peter have become involved in executions, and, giving a faithful Christian a heretic, and have burned him, as the priests did to Jesus.
