First Sunday in Advent. 13
READING FOR THE FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT.
Saint Matthew writes in chapter 21, verses 1-9.
And when Jesus drew near to Jerusalem, he came
to Bethphage (that village) at the Mount of Olives, then he sent
Jesus sent two of his disciples [Peter and Philip], saying to them:
Go to the castle (to Jerusalem) which is against you (the people)
you] is, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and
the colt with her; untie it and bring it to me. And if anyone asks you anything
die, say that the master of them (the donkey and the colt) has need of them (i.e.
needs to fulfill the prophecy], and immediately leaves them.
And all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken,
is through the prophet [Isaiah in 62 ch. 11 v.], who says:
Say to the daughter of Zion (i.e. to the people of Jerusalem): Behold, the King
Yours comes to you quietly, riding on a donkey, and on a colt the foal of a donkey.
servants [i.e., slaves to donkey work]. And the disciples,
They did as Jesus had commanded them, and brought him
donkey and colt; and they laid them on (the donkey and the colt)
donkey] his clothes, and I will command him to sit on them. And
A great crowd spread their cloaks on the road, and others
cutting (or chopping) branches from trees and branches
on the road. And the crowds that go before, and those that
I follow him, crying out, saying: Hosanna (i.e. Lord
salvation] by the son of David (i.e. through the son of David)!
Blessed is he who comes in the name of God.
A. This reading actually took place on Palm Sunday, therefore it is more relevant to that day of remembrance than to today. However, today we read it, remembering his coming, which the Christian congregation remembers today, calling the Czechs "Advent" in Latin; for the Latin adventus is the Czech word for arrival or visitation. And the Holy Church remembers this from this day until the day of Christ's birth; and so they call all that time Advent, that is, the time in which they remember Christ's visitation.
Know then that Christ's visitation is threefold, as the Scripture shows: First in the flesh. By this he visited us, when he, being
14 Reading 1.
God, incarnated in the life of the Virgin Mary. About this he himself says in 16 chap. 28 v. S. John: I came forth from the Father and have come into the world.
The second visitation of Christ is spiritual, by which He visits us with His grace; for He says, John 14:23: If a man love Me, he will keep My words; and My Father will love him, and We will come to him. This is what Christ means, that He and the Father will come to the man who loves Christ and keeps His words. And concerning this visitation He says in the Revelation of St. John, in chapter 3, verse 20: Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear My voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he will eat. Christ stands at the door, so that He is ready by grace to visit the will of man, and He knocks when He admonishes by inspiration, by pain, by terror, or by sickness, or by giving various gifts. And whoever hears the voice of his commandment, and opens the door to Christ, abandoning sin and completely turning his will to good, Christ will enter, visiting him with his grace; and if a person dies in that grace, not returning to sin, then Christ will dine with him and he with Christ, that is, he will enjoy eternal joy. And so Christ visits a person spiritually, even when a person leaves mortal sins and he forgives them to him, even when he grants his special grace, even when he comes to him with his grace at death. And also he visits evil people with terror, vengeance and eternal damnation, and especially at death. Because it says in St. Matt. in 24 ch. 42 v.: Watch, for you do not know at what hour your Lord will come. And in the revelation of St. John in 3 ch. 3 v. die: Therefore if you do not wake, I will come as a thief and you will not know at what hour I will come to you.
The third visitation of Christ is the future on the day of judgment, of which he himself says in 25:31-32 v. S. Matt.: When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all his angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his kingdom: and before him shall be gathered all flesh. Of this coming also we believe, that he shall come to judge the living and the dead.
Then you further understand that the first visitation happened once, as He became incarnate once; the second happens every day, as He visits the faithful with His grace every day, and the wicked with vengeance or admonition; the third is to happen only once. The First Visitation
First Sunday in Advent. 15
we should be very grateful, and so remember them fondly; the second we should be diligent, that he may deign to dwell with us, and that he may visit us with special grace on the day of his birth, we should devoutly observe; the third we should wait very diligently, for he commands us to be very diligent, that is, to guard ourselves from sin and to sing for God's grace. And for these three visitations the Holy Church has established that from this day onward we should strive more diligently in virtues than before, remembering that he came by incarnation for our salvation, and that he will visit us with his grace especially on the day of his birth, and that the third time he will come on the day of judgment and give us the eternal kingdom.
B. And for this visitation there is a threefold preparation: First, that the faithful, waiting for their master, should behave themselves honestly, and especially when he approaches. And this depends on the word of St. Isaiah in 1 ch. 16-17 v.: Cease to do evil, learn to do good. And as David says, Psalm 34, 15 and 37, 27: Depart from evil and do good. The second preparation is, that, hearing that so great a master is near, we should prepare ourselves, and this by a threefold custom: First, by preparing a house for him, that is, you
cleansing his soul from sins; for he says through Isaiah in 1 ch. 16 v.: Wash yourselves and be clean, cast away the evil of your thoughts from my eyes! Second, we must prepare ourselves in beautiful garments, as Isaiah says in 52 ch. 1 v.: Put on the garments of your glory, Jerusalem, the holy city! Jerusalem in this place means the congregation of the faithful, which is the holy city, in which Christ the King has eternal life
vati; and that city is to be clothed in the robe of glory, that is, in the virtue that makes a man glorious. And that robe is infinitely better to every soul than all the garments of this world with which the body is clothed: no virtue clothes a man better than any bodily garment; and that robe is to be white, that is, unstained by sin.
C. Thirdly, we must prepare ourselves to give worthy food to such a great master. The worthy food that Christ feeds on is his will to be fulfilled, as he himself says in 4 ch. 34 v. S. John: My food is to do the will of him who sent me, and to finish his work. And again he says, Joh. 6, 27: Prepare not that food which perishes, but that which endures to eternal life, which food the Son of man will give you. They prepare for themselves food which does not perish, who do the will of God and remain in it, for they will be in heaven forever.
16 Reading 1.
enough to enjoy the divinity. And so true Christians feed Christ every day, when his commandments are fulfilled. And he himself confesses this on the day of judgment, when he says to the righteous, Matt. 25, 35: I was hungry and you fed me; I was thirsty and you gave me drink.
Even so, we should prepare ourselves to remember his holy visitation many times, to pray for the second and third, and thus worthily receive his holy body on the nativity of God. For Saint Augustine says in his sermon: Most beloved brothers! from
By the grace of God, the days have already come for us, in which we are asked to sanctify the birth of God; therefore I beg and exhort that we work as best we can, so that on that day with a clear conscience, with great diligence, with a pure heart and body we may approach the altar of God, and His body and His blood, not to judgment, but to the healing of the soul and to salvation, may be worthily received. For in the body of Christ our life depends, as He Himself says, John 6:53: Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His blood, you have no life in you. Therefore, whoever wants to take life must change his life; for if he does not change his life, he will take his life to judgment, and it is more likely that he will be destroyed than that he will be made alive. How blessed is that soul that, with God's help, has so transformed its life that it is worthy to receive Christ as a guest! Again, how rare and pitiful is that conscience which is so defiled with evil deeds that Christ does not deign to dwell in it, but the devil begins to reign! All this says St. Augustine.
From all this, as Saint Paul commands in today's Epistle, let us take the lesson, Romans 13:12: Let us cast off the works of darkness, that is, let us put off sins that lead to eternal darkness, and put on the garments of light, that is, let us accept virtues that lead to eternal light. For thus living, we will well remember the visitation of Christ three times: we will be worthy that he may visit us with special grace now, then at death, and finally on the day of judgment. He has already visited us by his incarnation; let us remember that visitation that has already taken place. Thus he visited us by his grace in baptism, that he freed us from sins; and although we sinned after baptism, he visited us with grace in repentance; but there are those who have not sinned mortally after baptism, but He has visited them with special grace and continues to visit them. And we await the third visitation on the day of judgment, which we await
First Sunday in Advent 17
we must always be ready, for he himself dies, Luke 12:40, Matt. 25:13: Be ready, for at an hour you do not expect, the Son of Man comes. And we must be ready so that we may gladly suffer what befalls us for the sake of the beloved Christ, as he has for us, for sins, not owed to us, for his adversaries, gladly suffered a cruel death; to which death he voluntarily came to Jerusalem, and came on a donkey with great weeping, showing the people of Jerusalem a gracious visitation.
Therefore, today's reading is about the spiritual visitation by which He visited the faithful through His holy suffering: not to take away their goods, nor to strangle them, but to redeem them from death, to give them an eternal kingdom. Therefore, holy Zechariah prophesies, Zech. 9, 9, saying to the holy church: "Behold, your king has come to you, righteous and having salvation, he is poor, and riding on a donkey, and on a colt the foal of a donkey." In this speech, the prophet comforts the holy church, saying: "Behold, your king," a king merciful to revenge, mighty to defend, wise to report, rich in recompense. Die: yours, that he created you, yours, that he feeds you, yours, that he protects you from the devil, yours, that he redeemed you by death, yours, that he loved you until death, yours, that he will give an eternal kingdom, although you will finally be grateful. Therefore die: Behold, your king has come, or has come, "you righteous," who will give everyone according to their merit; "savior," or has come to save, as die himself, John 3:16-17: For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life; for God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.
And now you have his testimony, that he was sent from the Father into this world, not to judge the world, but to save the world, that is, the people chosen for salvation from the world: for they will not be condemned to eternal damnation. Therefore the prophet says to the holy church: Behold, your King comes to you, the righteous and the Savior! and "he was poor," that he might enrich you by his poverty, as St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 8, 9: Christ for our sakes was made poor, that we by his poverty might be enriched, know that, now in virtues and then in heavenly joy; for that is why he came poor "on a donkey's colt," as the reading testifies, which I do not want to explain now; for it seems better to me to keep it for Palm Sunday, because it was given at that time, and also so that I would not delay it any longer.
18 Reading 1.
Therefore, beloved, have enough of this, and prepare yourselves for the second and last visitation, desiring sins, prospering in virtues, fulfilling repentance, and earnestly requesting his visitation.
