Second Sunday in Advent. 19
READING FOR THE SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT.
It is written by St. Luke in chapter 21, verses 25-33.
At that time, J. u. s.: There will be signs in the sun and in the moon and in the stars, and on the earth many people from the roaring of the sea and from the waves, fainting from fear and expectation that will come on all the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken. And then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with great power and glory. And when these things begin to happen, look up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near. And he told them a parable: Look at the fig tree and all its branches; when it already puts out fruit, you know that summer is near. So you also, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near. Truly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all these things happen. Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
That Sunday was the memorial of the coming of Christ, humble and meek; today the reading shows the coming of Christ, mighty and glorious. For it is said there that the King came, meek and poor, riding on a donkey; but today the reading says that they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with great power and glory: and this is so that those who do not want to love the meek and humble may at least fear the mighty and glorious. And so the memory of the first visit is suitable for the elevation of hope, and the memory of the second for the preservation of fear, because Christians should have both hope and fear; for fear restrains them, so that they do not stumble into sin, and hope holds them back, so that adverse things do not defeat them. For Solomon says, Prov. 1:32: The turning away of the little ones will kill them, and the honor of fools will destroy them. Therefore, in today's reading, both fear is laid down and hope is shown: fear or terror from the beginning of the reading until those words: "And when these things shall begin;" and then hope begins here, when it is then said: "Lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth nigh." And our Savior lays down both fear and hope, and shows the signs which are
will stand before his visitation on the Day of Judgment, which will happen when he says: "There will be signs in the sun and in the moon,
20 reading 2.
"The second places his visitation, saying: "then shall he see the Son of man." The third places the consolation of the righteous, saying: "lift up your heads." The fourth places the admonition to warn against evil.
And so all this reading is laid down, that we may diligently attend to the last coming of Christ or to the visitation. For when the disciples asked Christ the Savior about the day of judgment, after Palm Sunday on the Mount of Olives, saying, Mt. 24, 3: Tell us, when shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? then among other words he answered them, saying: There shall be signs in the sun and in the moon, and so on. And the Savior places signs also in heavenly things, as in the sun, in the moon, and in the stars; and in earthly things, as in the earth, and in the sea, and in men, who shall faint with fear and trembling. And the Savior says: "There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars." And what signs, which in the reading of St. Matt. in the 24th chapter 29 v.: "The sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven." The sun already had a sign when it was darkened for the death of Christ, Mt. 27:45, and also the moon at that time had already lost its light, and the stars, which take their light from the sun. But it can be understood that the sun Christ will be darkened before the day of judgment, so that people will not see the living faith of that sun; and the moon, which signifies the Christian congregation, will not give its light, that is, that they will not shine with true doctrine, and also with good deeds; and the stars, that is, people, will fall from heaven, that is, they will fall from heavenly associations. Or the dragon Antichrist, as St. John testifies in the Revelation, Apoc. 12, 4, the third part will pull down the stars from heaven with its tail: not the stars of those that shine in heaven, for they will neither fall nor be pulled down by the dragon, for they will remain there forever; but people will fall away from heavenly things, through the terror and cunning of the Antichrist, and the seduction of his messengers.
And this Christ prophesied, saying beforehand to the disciples, Mt. 24, 4-5 and 24: Take heed that no one deceives you, for many will come in my name, saying, I am Christ! and will deceive many. And then shall false prophets arise, and shall shew great signs and wonders, insomuch that they shall deceive, if possible, the very elect. And this is now very much
full, because the truth of Christ and Christ no longer shines in people, nor does he want them to read and preach Christ
Second Sunday in Advent. 21
they did not name; and whoever they catch, who sincerely confesses the truth of Christ, they curse, drive, denounce, strangle and torture and imprison, and kill. As now in Moravia the official and others starved a faithful man to death, and the feet of the priest Martin, the preacher, were smeared with manure; and what happened in Prague and is still happening to those who lead the truth of Christ, is known to many people. And all this comes from the messengers of Antichrist, false preachers, who chase money from the people to their greed, pride, pleasure and fornication, giving forgiveness of sins for money, saying that the Pope is an earthly god, who has the power to give forgiveness of sins to whom he wills and when he wants: but he does not tell the people that Christ lives, Luke. 13, 3: Unless you repent of your sins, all will perish. For they have already so greatly obscured the truth, Christ, that preachers now name the Pope more than Christ, and more honor and hold the papal institution than the law of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore there is a multitude of his faithful sons in the lands; for in Bohemia and Moravia, in Meissen and England, and elsewhere there is great tribulation, as I am aware of it; for they murder, torture and curse faithful priests, and there is no beginning to enter Rome, yes, there is the height of all the evil of Antichrist: pride, greed, fornication, hypocrisy and sacrilege, so that sacrilege and greed have poured out from Rome to Bohemia. For they sell and buy archbishoprics more expensively than many estates in Bohemia, and they give indulgences for rent, as the messenger of Antichrist can get, so that he can deceive the common people more. And therefore people wither, some fearing to confess the truth against this heresy; others not knowing, because of the priestly division in preaching, what they should hold on to; thirds having great anguish, because others are thus in error; and fourths suffering slander, heresy and murder, and also because of the great tribulation of the truth of God. For the sea roars, that is, the people of this world, who compare themselves to the sea. I say: "roars," proclaiming that those who follow Christ and know his truth, that they are heretics and heretics. And to this David says, Psalm 93:4, that the rising of the sea is strange, that is, that men have risen strangely against Christ and against the truth, and have lifted up their voice; for again David says, Psalm 93:3: The rivers have lifted up their voice.
And so there are already signs in the sun of Christ, that because of the increase of sins people no longer see him with living faith; and there are signs in the moon-
22 reading 2.
net, that is, on those who should, taking the light of the Scriptures from Christ, shine to others, they no longer shine; and there are signs in the stars, that those who should cling to the desires of heaven, have turned to earthly customs and desires, and especially those who should shine to others: as there are masters and prelates, so know that they are seated above others in the spiritual office, because those teachings, who live badly, others worse, fall from the eternal light; as again, those who teach others to righteousness, being good
live, they will shine forever. As the prophet Daniel says in 12:3: Those who are taught will shine like the lightning of heaven; and those who turn many to righteousness, like the stars forever and ever, know that they will shine. Here you have it, that the prophet clearly calls the learned good people who teach others, stars; and they have their light from the sun of Christ, who is the sun of righteousness, as Malachi says, Mal. 4:2: Unto you that fear my name the sun of righteousness shall arise. But for the false priests and preachers the sun has gone down behind the mountain, as the prophet Micah says in 3:6: The sun shall go down upon the prophets, and the day shall be darkened over them. And immediately before that it says, Micah 3, 5: Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that lead my people astray, which bite with their teeth, and preach peace; and if no man put anything in their mouth, the Holy One shall make war or battle against them. And perhaps this scripture touches upon those who issue the cross upon those who do not want to be subjected to them according to their will, and call war holy, and battle holy, giving both deliverance from sins and torment to those who help in the battle. A strange thing: they themselves cannot rid themselves of fleas and flies, and then they want to rid others of the torments of hell by their giving, neither praying for it, nor living well otherwise! And if there is a faithful Christian who preaches against their evil, then they have hatred for him, and with invented evil he hinders the services of God, unable otherwise to hinder the preaching that announces their evil to the people.
And by this cunning the Antichrist supremely directs his anger against the freedom and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ. I have written about this cunning in full in other books, both in Czech and in Latin. And it seems to me that this cunning is the worst and most difficult for faithful Christians; for neither reproach, nor torture, nor death can stop the preaching of the truth in a faithful preacher of Christ, who loves God; but the invented construction of the service of God is a great burden, not
Second Sunday in Advent. 23
to him; who would like to preach, but to the people who would like to hear. For what can be more difficult for Christians than not to give them burial, baptism, confession, the body of God? Among which tasks is the most difficult if they do not want to baptize. But faithful and reasonable Christians would throw this: priests not obeying this commandment, and other people not caring where they would bury them, and infants in great need would baptize themselves, and thus with God's help they would tear apart the Antichrist's nets, with which he cleverly deceives people under the name of holy obedience. And this is that great tribulation, of which the Savior speaks, Mt. 24, 21-22: that then there will be great tribulation, such as has not been since the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever will be. And unless those days had been shortened, no one would have been saved; but for God's chosen ones will be cut short.  
And certainly the course of the present time gives the faithful the understanding of that holy reading about the signs of the day of judgment, so that, understanding the course, they may weigh the words of their Savior, and, understanding, they may diligently act against the cunning of the Antichrist; for after these signs the coming of the Lord will not fail.
the walk of the Son of God. Of which the reading goes on, that "the powers of the heavens move," the angels, as St. Gregory says, move to judgment with the Son of Man against sinners. For the scripture says, Wis. 5:18: He will prepare creation for the vengeance of enemies. Therefore it goes on to say: "And then shall they see the Son of Man," that is, Jesus Christ, who is the son not of two men, but of one man, the Virgin Mary. "Going," that is, to judgment. "In a cloud" - which cloud it will be, he knows! "With great power," that is, great power against proud sinners; for David the prophet says, Psalm 97:3: A fire shall go before him, and shall burn up all his enemies round about. "And with majesty," that is, to the consolation of the righteous; for immediately he gives his comfort further, saying: "And when these things begin to come to pass, look up," that is, look to my help with a pure heart, "and lift up your heads," that is, your minds; as St. Gregory says: To lift up your heads is to lift up your minds to the joy of the heavenly Father. Or further the Savior says: "For your redemption draweth nigh," as if to say: your deliverance will be at hand, and the eternal damnation of the wicked. Further he reads: "And he spake unto them a parable: Behold the fig tree, and all the branches"; and so on; the Savior gives his disciples a similar sign, that as the fruit on the branches is tender, then summer is near: also when there are already pestilences, famines, wars, earthquakes, and the signs foretold in the world,
24 Reading 2
Then the kingdom of God is near to the faithful, that is, the blessedness which they will have in heaven. Therefore the Savior continues: "So you also, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near." And our Savior confirms these words with an oath, saying: "Truly I say to you, this generation will not pass away," that is, people will not go from death to immortality, "until all things," that is, know what has already been said, "are fulfilled." He proves this by saying: "Heaven and earth will pass away," that is, the heaven will change, that it will be more beautiful after the Day of Judgment; the earth will also change, "but my words will not pass away," that is, they will not change, but what I meant by those words will always happen. That is briefly for reading.
And since the gracious Savior often spoke of His coming or visitation after this, warning His faithful and telling them how terrible it will be, therefore we should diligently remember that coming, greatly value it, and thus we should live well; for the Lord will come to the wicked, very terrible, so that the damned will say to the mountains, Hosea 10:8 and Luke 23:30: "Fall on us!" He will come who will not listen to any damned one; He will come who will announce all the evils of every man to all angels, men and devils; He will come who will burn all the damned with eternal fire; He will come who will condemn to eternal fire and darkness, and to every evil deed. Therefore, Saint Gregory says today in his sermon: That day, most beloved brothers! Set your eyes before it. And whatever seems difficult now will be easy, for the prophet Joel 2:31 says about that day: The great day of God is near, very near and very terrible, and who can endure it? And the prophet Zephaniah in 2 K. says: The great day of God is near, very near and very soon, the voice of the day of God is bitter, there will be great torment, that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and anguish, a day of mourning and desolation, a day of darkness and gloom, a day of clouds and storm, a day of trumpet and sound. This Zephaniah shows that the day of judgment for the wicked will be very terrible. About which Saint Peter writes thus, 2 Peter 3:10-12: The day of God will come like a thief, in which the heavens will pass away with great violence, and the elements will melt with fervent heat, and the earth and the works that are in it will be burned up. And since all these things are
and how we ought to be in holy conversation and good deeds, waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the heavens will be dissolved on fire, and the elements will melt with fervent heat. Thus the third apostle writes about the day of judgment, on which day a great storm will come upon us from above.
Second Sunday in Advent. 25
Judge, offended by the wicked, angry with them, with a terrible hell opened below, on the right all sins openly accusing, on the left devils dragging to hell, around and behind the world burning, in front angels driving to hell, inside the conscience cruelly biting, from within eternal fire burning the body, and all the saints confirming the sentence and saying with the judge: Go, you cursed, into eternal fire!
O most beloved! considering so heavy and terrible the coming of Christ and the day of judgment, let us diligently remember the first coming of Christ, that having become incarnate, he came into the world, in the work of our salvation. Let us be grateful, that now he may visit us spiritually with his grace, and in death may he find us ready. Let us remember the last terrible coming, that we may be destined for heavenly joy; for St. Gregory says in today's sermon: That day, most beloved brothers, remember with all your mind, correct your lives, change your habits, overcome evil temptations, avenge sins committed with tears; for the coming of the eternal judge, being the more secure, you will see, the more now you prepare for his cruelty, fearing it. May the merciful Savior, true God and man, blessed forever, Jesus Christ, bring about all these things for our salvation!
