26 Reading 3.
READING FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT.
St. Matthew in chapter 11, verses 2-10.
At that time, when John heard in chains the deeds of
Christ, sent two of his disciples, saying to him (Jesus): Are you the one who is to come [to redeem], or do we look for another? And Jesus answered and said to them [John's disciples]: Go and tell John what you have heard and seen: the blind receive their sight [being healed], the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have the word of God preached to them [evangelisantur, that is: they hear the word of God and are made good by it; and blessed is he (i.e. he) who does not stumble [does not believe] in me. And when they had departed, Jesus began to speak to the multitudes concerning John: What did you go out into the wilderness to see? a punishment tossed by the wind (for there is no man who is swayed by pride or inconstancy? And what did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft (clothes) [but walking in sackcloth]? Even those who are clothed in soft [clothes] are in kings' houses [as proud and delightful]. And what did you go out to see? A prophet? Indeed, he says to you, more than for a year; this is certainly he, of whom it is written [Malachi the prophet writes in 3 ch. 1 v.J: Behold, I send my angel (i.e. messenger: angelus in Greek, messenger in Czech)] before your face, who will prepare your dough before you.
In this reading there is a mention of the imprisonment of Saint John, the Baptist of Christ; secondly, of the wonderful works of the Lord Jesus Christ; thirdly,
A. on the praise of St. John. On the prison die reading: "When John in chains heard the works of Christ." Then know that St. John was already in chains in prison because he had struck down King Herod for adultery, as St. Mt. writes in 14 c. 3-4 v. saying: Herod seized John,
and bound him and put him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother's wife; for John had said to him: It is not fitting for you to have her. And Saint Mark says in 6 c. 20 v.: Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just and holy man, and he kept him in mind, and heard him, and did many things, and was glad to hear him. Why? says St. John Chrysostom in the sermon
Third Sunday in Advent. 27
about Saint John: John the Baptist preached what was for the law, what was for righteousness, what was for salvation; certainly he preached what was not for hatred, but for love. Again he says: Herod John admonishes with holy admonitions, not accusations, admonishes, as a lover of fornication, wanting him to be saved, but not damned. But since fornication is difficult for anyone to remain, therefore Herod did not want fornication to remain and the fornicator
to release the adulterous woman, he bound John and put him in prison; and he, being in chains, having heard of the works of Christ, sent his disciples to him. Therefore the reading says: "When John heard in chains of the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples, and said to him, Art thou he that should come, or look we for another?" Then know that holy John does not doubt whether Christ is he who came to take away the sins of the world; for he first confessed, saying, John 1:29: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world!" and he knew him, being yet in his mother's womb, and rejoiced; and when he baptized him, he heard the testimony of God the Father, that he was his beloved Son, whom we should obey. But Saint John, having care for his disciples and other people, asked them not to doubt Christ, but to believe in him, to obey him, and finally
followed; and therefore he bade his disciples ask Christ, saying: Art thou he that should come as the promised redeemer, or look we for another?
And further reading: "And Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and tell John the things which ye have heard and seen;" for, as St. Luke writes in 7 c. 21 v., in that hour he healed many of infirmities, and of plagues, and of evil spirits, and gave sight to many blind men. And answering, he said unto them, Go and tell John the things which ye have heard in the sermon, and seen in the miracles which he did. Here St. Ambrose saith: The Lord answereth rather by his works than by words. And St. Jerome saith: Be silent in words, speak in deeds. And thus the gracious Saviour gave instruction, not to John, but to his disciples, that they might believe that he was he whom they expected, that he should first take away their sins and deliver them from damnation. And to show that he is the one who healed many, he also says, "The blind see," and so on. Here
B. Know that by the blind are meant those who sin out of stupidity; the lame those who do both evil and good; the lepers those who sin out of great desire; the deaf those who are hardened in anger; the dead those who sin out of great habit. And all these
28 Reading 3.
Now by the grace of our Savior they can be healed, and many are already healed, so that those who sinned out of stupidity now see, knowing what sin is, and how they were blinded by sin; then the lame, who were both evil and good, are now always good; and the lepers, who were corrupted by sin from lust, are now clean; and the deaf, who were insensible to the word of God, are now willingly obeying it; and the dead, that is, who were dead in the soul through mortal sin and sinned out of habit, are now rising out of that habit; and in these five spiritual things there is an eternal wonder than in bodily healings, and greater is the grace of God than in them. And then the dear Savior performed the sixth miracle, saying: "The poor benefit from the word of God," Latin: evangelisantur, that is: they enjoy reading, which is the word of God, and thus they benefit themselves and others, they hear themselves and teach others.
"The poor," understand the humble in spirit, those who prosper in the word of God. C. Know then that by the preaching of the word of God the mind is enlightened, the second desire is regulated, the evil desire is quenched, the stubbornness in anger is abolished, sin is driven away, and the grace of God is produced in man. Know from this that whoever of these six benefits hears the word of God, none of whom is on himself, has the sign that he listens to the word of God profitlessly. O blessed are the poor in spirit, to whom the Savior is sent to preach to them As he himself did through Isaiah, Is. 61, 1-2, Luke. 4, 18-19: To preach good tidings to the meek, he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the door to them that are shut up, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. D. Further in the reading the savior says: "And blessed is he who shall not be offended in me!" Here know that there are various people worse than Christ. Some are worse than his mercy, saying that he does not avenge, having avenged, or that he does not avenge, having avenged; of the first saying, as Habakkuk says in 1 ch. 13 v.: Why dost thou not look on them that do evil? that is, why wilt thou not avenge? Of the second said that lazy servant, Matt. in 25 ch. 24 v.: I know that thou art cruel! Some are worse than his wisdom, thinking that he would do something that he should not do; like those who curse the air, or those who think that they could invent better than God has done; and so they are surprised that good things happen to the wicked, saying the word of Jeremiah in 15 c.: Why is the way of the wicked frequent? know that why does it happen to the wicked according to their will? No-
Third Sunday in Advent. 29
who are worse off for not wanting to suffer with him, as his disciples were offended, to whom he said, Mt. 26, 31: All of you will be offended because of me! Some are worse off for his poverty, as the priests in general, who do not want to be poor voluntarily; so are
The young man who went away from Christ was offended, when he said to him, Matt. 19:21: Go, sell all that you have, and give to the poor, and come, follow me. Some are worse than his words, saying with the Jews in 6 c. 60 v. S. John: This is a hard saying, and who can listen to it? And so are all who do not keep his commandments, thinking them to be hard; and so in general on Christ they are
Worse is he who does not believe in him and in him, and who does not do what he has commanded. Therefore blessed is he who does not stumble at all because of him; for although many were stumbled, they were later restored by his grace.
E. Then the reading: "And when they were departed, Jesus began to speak unto the multitudes concerning John: What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the wind?" as if to say: Do ye suppose that John was as reed shaken with the wind, empty within, having no grace of God in him? And do ye suppose that he was shaken by flattery, that he was sent unto me, and by inconstancy, that he first bore witness unto me, saying, John 1:29: Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world? And ye say, Art thou it? or look we for another? Know that he hath not moved from his testimony, as a reed shaketh before the wind. Here St. Gregory speaks thus: The reed, as soon as the wind toucheth it, it shaketh it to one side. And what by means of reed? One is the carnal desire, which, as soon as it is touched by favor or reproach, immediately turns aside. For if the breeze of favor blows, it rejoices, boasts, and all turns to favor; but if the breeze of reproach blows from where the breeze of praise was blowing, then it immediately turns to anger. But John did not run away from punishment swayed by the wind, because neither the favor of praise made him a flatterer, nor did anyone's anger make him cruel, nor did common things elevate him in pride, nor did adverse things humble him in virtue; therefore he does not run away from a reed swayed by the wind, which no thing moves from the uprightness of its state. Therefore, let us learn, beloved, that we may not be like reeds shaken by the wind; let us establish our purpose amidst the air of tongues; let our state of mind stand unmoved; let no slander incite us to anger, nor let favors incline us to unworthy favors, nor let things that are contrary to our will be forgotten.
30 Reading 3.
hear, so that we, who are established in the constancy of faith, may not be unsteadily moved by the things of this world. That is St. Gregory. Briefly understand: do not let yourself be moved or flattered to pride, nor
Do not let anger lead to anger, nor honor lead to the sin of pride or pleasure, nor let adversity, such as poverty or any other thing, move you to impatience. If you do this, then you will not be tossed about by the wind of punishment, and you will be worthy of Christ's praise, as he praised St. John.
F. Then Christ says: "And what did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft clothes?" As if he were saying: Jant is not a flatterer; for if he had wanted to flatter, he would not have lived in the desert, nor would he have sat in a hut, being in Herod's prison. If he had wanted to flatter, then he would have flattered the king, not me.
to the poor; for those who want to walk in soft and beautiful clothes, are at the houses of kings and flatter. Oh, what flatterers there are, and especially priests at the courts of princes, kings and lords, and especially at the court of the Pope! to whom the greatest flatterers climb, and pray and worship more than to the Lord God. And they do all this, that they may walk in soft clothes and expensive things, that they may breed pride, pleasure and greed! Surely they are far from the life of John who have gone astray! And woe to us who do not want to suffer, and who, living lightly, want to be saved! Woe to those who wear proud clothes for the sake of boasting, who cut them strangely, who have a lot of them, of which moths than they enjoy as much or more! And those St. James the Apostle exhorts, saying in 5 c. 1-3 v.: Weep now, ye rich, and howl for your miseries that are come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten, your gold and silver are corroded, and rust shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh and your body as fire! Remembering this, wise men do not multiply costly raiment for themselves; but as they may likewise cover their shame and ward off the cold, and satisfy the need of the body, so they use raiment. For for these things was raiment given by God to Eve and Adam, when they sinned; for the crown gave them to cover their shame, and a fur coat to keep them from the cold. And John had a coat, by which he repelled both shame and cold; Therefore the Savior praises him for not walking in soft clothing.
Further reading: "And what did you go out to see? A prophet?" as if to say that John is not silent out of envy, as if he wanted to be called a prophet over me.
Third Sunday in Advent. 31
year; therefore "I tell you that he is more than any other prophet, for he is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my angel before thy face." This word is the word of God the Father to the Son; for God the Father before Christ, his Son, sent John, that he should first preach, first baptize, first die for preaching, and thus prepare the way for the people to know Christ and believe in him. Therefore he said to the priests of Jerusalem, in 1 ch. 26-27 v. S. John: I baptize with water, but among you stands one whom you do not know: he is he who comes after me, who is preferred before me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose. And so John was sent by God to preach before Christ, as a man, first to baptize, and first to prepare the way for the people; and that way is the way of Christ, which he followed after John, to baptize us, to free us from sins, and finally, even though we are good, to give us eternal life by grace.
