32 Reading 4.
READING FOR THE FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT.
Saint John writes in chapter 1, verses 19-26.
At that time the Jews sent priests and scribes from Jerusalem to John to ask him, "Who are you?" And he confessed that he was not the Christ, and did not deny that he was. And he confessed that he was not the Christ. And they asked him, "What then? Are you Elijah?" And he answered, "I am not Elijah, as you say! Are you the prophet?" And he answered, "I am nothing." Then they said to him, "Who are you? That we may give an answer to those who sent us; what do you say about yourself?" I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: "Reprove the works of the Lord, as the prophet Isaiah said." And those who were sent were from the scribes. most contrary to the truth
they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not the Christ, nor Elias, nor the Prophet? John answered them, saying, I baptize with water, but there standeth one among you, whom ye know not whether he be God and Christ;
He who comes after me (baptize with the Holy Spirit) is the one who is preferred before me.doneis. [in dignity more worthy than man, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose (if he had shoes). These things happened at Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
This holy reading shows the goodness of St. John and the wickedness of the priests, and thus teaches faithful Christians to follow in the goodness of St. John, and not to fall into the wickedness of the priests. John's goodness is shown in the confession of the truth and in humility: he confessed the truth, saying what he was not, and did not deny what he was; he showed humility, saying: I have silenced the voice of him that crieth. The wickedness of the priests, who sent and were sent, shows that they hated the life of St. John, as the reading testifies; for they say: "Then baptizest thou?" And our Savior says in 11 c. 18 v. S. Mat.: John came neither eating, i.e. meat, nor drinking, i.e. wine, and they say: He hath a devil! i.e. in himself.
Fourth Sunday in Advent. 33
Secondly, their malice is shown, that they do not want to have enough good from the word, but press, saying: "Then do you baptize, since you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?" Oh, what malice do the priests of today have, who call others who live well, devils, or when they call them heretics and heretics, then they consider them devils. And this is what the Savior prophesied to his faithful in 10 ch. 25 v. S. Mat., saying: For they call the householder a devil, but even more so his household. And as they forbade John to baptize, saying: Then do you baptize? so the present forbids preaching and baptizing and serving mass to those who know the truth of God. They themselves do not preach the truth sincerely, so that people may forsake their sins, and they forbid others; just as those priests did not preach the law of God, and they hindered Christ, stopping his mouth, as St. Luke 11:53 testifies, and cursing those who believed in him, as St. John 9:28 testifies. They also do this today, sending their messengers from Rome and Prague, and obtaining bulls to stop preaching in chapels and burn books; as happened during the time of Archbishop Zbynek, and is happening now in the turmoil of the Prague Archbishopric. Mistake! They do not listen to what God says in this reading: Make straight the way of God! John preached, he himself was alive well, he showed others the way to salvation, he rebuked them from their sins, and how they should be alive, he showed them by his sermons; Therefore he said, "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of God!"
Here we mean that Saint John humbly confessed his frailty, saying: "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness," that is: I call. A. from him who calls in the wilderness. And so understand that Saint John is the caller of God, preaching in the wilderness and calling people to repentance, saying Luke in 3 c. 8 v.: Do worthy works of repentance, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And this call is made by God, who calls to repentance; God calls man through every creature, as St. Augustine says Lib. 11. Conf.: Heaven and earth and all things that are in heaven and on earth, even everywhere tell me to love you, without ceasing to tell all people, so that they may not have excuses that they have not loved God. Secondly, God calls out in the desert of this world, that every man is very frail; therefore He said to Isaiah in 40 c. 6 v.: Cry out! And Isaiah: What shall I cry out? And God said to him: Every man is hay, and all his glory as the flower of the field! This is what Solomon means, being disappointed by the vanity of the world, and in Eccl. ult., 12, 8: Mar-
34 Reading 4.
vanity above vanities, and all things vanity! that is: a man who gives himself to things which, whenever he abandons God, will find nothing but vanity for himself; for all comforts of all things perish for him. Therefore, it is necessary for a man to diligently serve God, and to enjoy the things which the Lord God has given him, nothing further than for His praise and for his own salvation; and so that he may first know himself: who is? who is he? where is he? and where will he be? Who? that man is created by God and redeemed by His blood; and who is he? that he is poor because of sins and insufficient in deeds; and where is he? that in the poor world, which is a true desert, full of poisonous snakes, i.e. priests and other evil slanderers, whom Saint John and Christ said were of the serpentine generation. And where will he be? Woe to those who are cast into eternal fire!
And certainly, if a man often looked into himself and knew himself, then he could know God and many other things for his own benefit. Therefore the wise men wrote above the doors of their schools: "Know thyself!" so that whoever wants to know wisdom should first begin with himself; for he who does not know himself, how can he know other things? Saint John, knowing himself for what he is, humbly confessed that he is the voice of one crying in the wilderness; and he recognized and announced the dignity of the Savior, saying, "I baptize with water," showing that he will baptize after me; but among you there is both God and man, whom you do not know because of your sin and ignorance of prophecy. He is the one who came after me to baptize, preach and teach, as after me
He was conceived in life alongside humanity, and was born after me; he who was made before me: not made alongside divinity, nor first created alongside humanity, but he who is first in dignity before me and before every man.
Here remember that Christ was not made in divinity, and that since man is made after St. John, yet in dignity he is made first: And this dignity John confesses, saying: "Whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose." As if he were saying: And what wonder is it that there is one more worthy than I, whom I know to have been born after me, but I do not fully know the mystery of his birth? Thus says St. Gregory In Om. And thus by the strap with which the shoe is tied to the foot is understood the union of Christ's humanity with divinity; for the Son of God took upon Himself humanity in that likeness, that as before it is a foot, and remaining the foot takes upon
Fourth Sunday in Advent. 35
shoes and will be hidden under shoes: also the divinity in the person of the Son of God took upon itself humanity and remained divinity, hidden from the eyes of the flesh under humanity. And this union of divinity with humanity John is not worthy to untie, as a child, humbly confessing his incompetence in it: I am not worthy to untie the thong of his shoes.
From this speech the black monks conclude against the barefooted that Christ walked barefoot like them, saying that if John had not said so about his shoes, he would not have had them; and the barefooted ones, in turn, say against them that Christ walked barefoot like them, otherwise Mary Magdalene would not have been able to wash his feet with tears at the feast. But in this dispute neither they nor these have a good reason, except that the sin remains with both of them, that they did not
They want to follow the poor Christ without the desire for goods, and so having a desire too great for goods, both feet are unshod; but Christ, who for us underwent poverty, was in his mind shod from the desire for temporal goods, and when he pleased, then he walked sometimes in shoes and sometimes barefoot. And I cannot untie him, whether he ever walked in shoes, or never walked; but I have enough that for me, a sinner, he walked in the world as he pleased.
