Fourth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 55
FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.S. Matt. in chapter 8, verses 1-13.
At that time (the first year of his preaching) when Jesus came down from the mountain (St. Jerome: Tabor), great multitudes followed him. And behold, a leper came to him, begging him, saying, Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean. And Jesus stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, I am willing; be clean! And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And Jesus said to him, Tell no man (boasting of his healing), but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift [sacrifice] which Moses commanded (to be offered to those freed from leprosy), for a testimony to them (so that the priests may testify to him that he is no longer leprous). And when (Jesus) entered Capernaum (that city), a centurion (a centurion) came to him, begging him
him, saying, Lord! My servant [i.e., a servant] lies at home, suffering terribly. And Jesus said to him, I will come and heal him. And the centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that he should come under my roof; but speak a word, and my servant shall be healed. For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers: and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Go, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. When Jesus heard this, he marveled, and said to them that followed him, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel: and I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall recline with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with thee shall I eat bread, and with thy bread (saints] and with Jacob (saints] in the kingdom of heaven; and the sons of the kingdom shall be cast out into the outer darkness (hell); there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it unto thee! And the man was healed in that hour.
A. This holy reading, for the confirmation and instruction of the faithful, sets forth two miracles which our Savior performed out of great power and grace: one miracle, that He healed a leper, and the other, that He healed a man with a broken leg; and thereby He demonstrated the divine power and grace, that we might believe,
56 Reading 8.
that he is a mighty God, and they hoped that he was merciful. "And great multitudes followed him," for various reasons: some because of his famous customs, some from religion, some spectators, to hear something strange or see miracles; the sick, to be healed, and the hungry, to be fed; and the priests and scribes, to seize him in deed or in word, to slander and revile him. And all these can be found in the readings. "And behold, a leper came, praying to him." S. Mark 1, 40: Kneeling on his knees, the leper confessed the immense power of Christ, that, leaving other physicians, he came to Jesus, knelt down, and prayed, saying: "Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean." Here every sinner has a lesson to learn, that there is no one who can cleanse a spiritual person from leprosy, only the Lord God, to whom he must flee, humble himself and pray that he may deign to cleanse his soul from leprosy.
B. And know that leprosy in Scripture means mortal sin: first because, as in the Old Testament, so now leprosy expels a person from the community, so that he may not live with it, eat, drink, or otherwise associate with it: also spiritually, mortal sin expels a person from the community, the holy church, so that he may not eat the body of Christ with it, drink his blood, and partake of nothing for spiritual salvation, just as he does not partake of anything while he remains in it. And in Czech the word is well "malamoecenstvie," and from it a person is "leprous"; for a person can do little while he is in mortal sin, but he cannot worthily pray, eat, or drink, and is separated from all holy communion. Therefore in German the word is well aus s e c z i k, that is, put out of the holy community. And if a man meant and weighed this, then he would choose a thousand times better to be lame in the body than to fall into mortal sin; for if he were leprous in the body and suffered gladly, he would be warned of sin, and would be a great saint. But what is the use of a man if he is very beautiful and healthy in the body, and in the soul leprous with sin and so very abominable to God? and if he dies, he will be damned with the devils for ever, unless, having come with great humility, he will pray to the Savior, saying: "Lord! if you will, you can heal me." And consider that he asks wisely; for when he says: "Lord," he confesses the dignity of Christ, that he is the Lord of the whole world; and when he says: "if you will," he confesses his free will; and when he says: "you can," he confesses his
Fourth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 57
great power. And so he placed his hope and his health in the will and power of Christ; for what pleases Christ he can do. And he wisely placed his health at His will, as if to say: I do not know whether it is Your will that I should be well, nor do I know whether physical health is suitable for me. In this He gave us a lesson that we should not ask You for health in vain, unless it is the power of God and for our benefit. "And Jesus stretched out His hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be clean." Here the Savior shows humility, that He deigned to touch with His holy hand the little one; secondly, He shows His readiness to hear when a man begs Him much, saying, "I will"; thirdly, He shows His divine power, when He says, "Be clean!" In Latin it says: m u n d a r e, and I have no knowledge, the word m u n d a r e would be used in that place as much as to purify; but it should not be interpreted that way.
C. And know that the gracious Savior did not in vain stretch out His hand and touch the leper; for the touching of His hand means that His flesh or humanity was as an instrument or member of the divinity for working miracles, but the divinity especially worked those miracles through humanity. The second means the touching of Christ, that in the Old Testament, although it was forbidden to touch a leper, yet it was not forbidden to him who would not be defiled by touching, but rather by touching he would give health to him whom he touched. Thus Elijah touched the dead youth, whom he raised, 3 Kings 17:21, and Elisha also touched the dead and raised him by the power of God, 4 Kings 4:34; By whose power Christ healed this leper, of whom it is said: "And immediately his leprosy was cleansed." And Christ commands the leper, saying: "Tell no one!" This can be understood in various ways: first, that in this Christ gave an example to priests, bishops and others, that when they do something good, they should not boast, nor ask that the one to whom they do something good praise them for it. On the contrary, the priests sin greatly, boasting that they have the power to heal and absolve the souls of lepers, to send to heaven and hell whomever they please. And then the worldly people, when they give something to someone, want the heralds to call for it, and when they do something for God, they immediately want to have a name, and to attach their shields to it as a sign, or to write it. To them the Lord Christ says under oath, Mt. 5: All his works he does to be seen of men: verily I say unto you, They shall receive their reward.
58 Reading 8.
There are also priests and scribes who swear by it, who serve mass and say the hours, and do other works to be seen by men.
The second may be understood to mean that he should not tell anyone, boasting over others, that he had healed him, nor should he offend others. The third, as Saint Jerome says, that there was no need to say in words what was evident in deed. The fourth, that he should first tell no one but the priests, so that they, as the first confessors of God's truth, might announce the deed of Christ to the people. Therefore Christ immediately says: "But go, show yourself to the priests." And since the parable established in the Old Law had not yet ceased, therefore Jesus says: "and offer the gift that Moses commanded" in the fifth book of Leviticus in 14 ch. 1-32 v.
D. This the priests understand that they have to give them sacrifices from the commandment of God: some say that seven times, and others say that three times every man should offer to them in a year, and that they must give them from confession, saying: Behold, Christ says to the healed man: "Go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded." If the priests meant that Christ sent those healed from leprosy to the priests, that they might believe that Christ is the true God, that He heals in this way; secondly, that they might tell the people that He, but not they, cleanses from leprosy! This they do not so much proclaim as they proclaim that they must confess to them, that they are to cleanse, forgive sins, and that they can take money for it. But for this reason Christ did not send the healed to the priests, but, as St. Jerome did, that they might believe in the Savior; and as John Chrysostom, that they might not say that Christ did not keep the law; and as Origen, that he was healed not by the custom of the law, but by the grace of Christ; and also that they might announce that the man could now dwell in the community as healthy.
E. And then the saints mean this, that although a man's sins are often forgiven by God before confession, nevertheless the sinner should, out of humility, go to a wise priest and confess his sins to him, and ask from him good instruction, and receive from him a worthy repentance for his sins, by which he would
he delayed and did not return to sin again; and then the sinner shows himself to the priest. But should he offer what in the Old Testament the one healed of leprosy offered in a figure, that is, in the meaning of spiritual things, where would he get it? For he should offer two sparrows, a cake; six measures of oil, cedar wood, hyssop, and many other things; but as St. Remigius says: two sparrows for the soul
Fourth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 59
and the body signifies, the cake love, the six measures of oil six mercy, and the hyssop humility. Certainly, he who offers these things fulfills the commandment of Christ about sacrifice; but the stingy priest is unwilling to accept the sacrifice, he would rather take one penny than see all these things on a man!
Further on we read: "And when he was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, beseeching him." Having healed the Jew, Christ came to Capernaum, that city, to do good to the Gentile; for this centurion was a Gentile, appointed by the Romans to govern that city, Capernaum, which was the chief city of Galilee, that country. That faithful centurion, as St. Luke testifies in 7 ch. 3 and 6 v., first sent to Jesus Jews of his own race; and when he learned from the messengers that Jesus wished to come unto him, as others say, and it is similar, that he set out on the journey alone out of humility and religion, and honestly
He forbade him to go into his house, knowing that it was not lawful for the Jews, except it were forbidden, to have intercourse with a Gentile in his house, to eat and drink. And to this he came, that the centurion said, "Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof." And Jesus, knowing his faith, which he had in divinity, did not pity him, as he pitied the rabbit in 4 c. 47 v. S. John, which rabbit begged Jesus to come quickly before his son died; but Jesus spoke willingly to the centurion, as to one who believed that he would come to his servant who was sick and heal him. And the centurion, believing that Christ is God, and knowing his humiliation, confesses that he is not worthy that Christ should enter under the roof of his house, but that it is enough for him, if Christ wills it out of his immense power and mercy, that no matter how far he may be physically, if he says the word that his servant may be healed, it will be done immediately. And the centurion proves this by saying that since he is appointed by the power of Caesar, he orders the servant
and they immediately do what he commands: then, of course, the emperor of the whole world, being everywhere next to his divinity, can command any of his creatures, and they will immediately obey; for the power of the God of Christ to command every creature is immeasurably greater than that of a centurion to command the servants of the emperor. "And when Jesus heard" the confession of such great faith by the pagan knight, "he marveled, and said to those who followed him, "I have not found so great faith, not even in Israel," that is, in the Jewish people.
60 Read 8.
But against this saying some one will say: But wonder is not from the thing first known F.; and since Jesus knows and knows all things from eternity, how then did he wonder? The answer is that Christ has two knowledges: one divine, by which he knows all things from eternity, the second his knowledge is from the bodily sense of smell; as it is first said that he saw something with bodily sight after he had not seen before, and also heard, and tasted, and touched. And so he heard this confession of the centurion's great faith, which he had not heard before, and so beside this knowledge he wondered. But some scorner would still say that Christ is not telling the truth here, saying: "I have not found so great faith in Israel;" for in his mother, the Virgin Mary, he found the same faith and so great, and also in his apostles. Here the answer may be that by this Israel is understood only the race of Israel, that is, of the father Jacob, but not the place in which his race dwells; and by the found of Christ is understood the knowledge of Christ as man, which knowledge he first divinely knew. And so much is to be understood that Christ, as man, did not find so great a faith in the race of Jacob; but in the Virgin Mary and in his apostles, whom he first chose and divinely enlightened, he knew, as God, the eternal faith, but he did not find it, as man. St. Augustine and St. Jerome think that Christ did not find so great a faith at that time among the Jews, except in the holy fathers, in whom is the foundation of faith, and except in the prophets; but St. John Chrysostom" thinks that because at the early beginning of faith Christ did not find such great faith: for others believed, having seen wonders and miracles; but this centurion, having not seen, having heard one thing, had great faith. Of these words which is more apt to be interpreted, may God grant that it always come in the present: that Christ spoke the truth, saying, "I have not found so great faith in Israel."
With this word he has humiliated the unbelieving, ungrateful Jews, and exalted the grateful Gentiles. Therefore he goes on to say that from all parts of the world the chosen Gentiles will turn to faith, and will rest with their fathers.
G. saints in the heavenly kingdom; but the sons of the generation of Christ, that is, the Jews, for ingratitude, "shall be cast out into outer darkness," that is, into the deprivation of heavenly light in hell. And in the words
those darknesses "from within," first because of the difference between the inner darknesses, which are the lack of God's grace in the soul: these are sins and those
Fourth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 61
in the words of darkness within; secondly because the damned, eclipsed in hell, are already without all hope of grace and deliverance. Therefore their darkness is from within, that is to say without end; but here sinners who repent are not so without end, and so also from within. Therefore, if there were no other vengeance, but that darkness of hell, of which there will be no end, man should be sufficiently afraid, and warn against sins very diligently; for it is not in vain that the Savior mentions that darkness so often in the reading. And that it will not be enough in that darkness in hell, therefore the Savior says that "there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth." There will be pain without end, both internally in the soul, and internally in the body. By weeping is meant pain internally, for bodily tears would flow there from the eyes to the brain constantly; for since the damned will not drink there, and the cruel fire will burn them, therefore they will not shed tears after this time. Then the gnashing of teeth, which is hard bones from the pain of beating, means the pain with which the body will be tormented. And it is enough, through all the torments that he names about the damned, to lay down eternal joy deprivation, eternal darkness, eternal fire, and from these things great sorrow in the soul, that there will never be death in them, and so without hope eternal pain and torment in the soul and in the body. Therefore Isaiah says in 66 c. 24 v.: Their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched. That worm is a sorrowful wriggling in the soul, and that fire is the eternal burning of the body. Therefore, Christ says on the day of judgment to the damned, in 25 c. 41 v. S. Mat.: Go, you cursed, into the eternal fire, which is prepared for the devil and his servants. Also, by weeping is meant sorrow, and by gnashing of teeth is meant the eternal sin of the damned, by which they will oppose the eternal goodness of the Lord God forever.
Then finally Jesus gave the centurion, a very faithful soldier, the opportunity to do as he wished, according to his faith; and it happened wonderfully, for "the servant was healed in that hour." He calls the servant a servant, as Scripture often says. And this we have the teaching that according to the measure of a man's faith the grace of God is given; therefore the interpretation is: To each as he believes, so it is done to him. Then in this good centurion I show us, for example, great humility, that he says: "Lord, I am not worthy" and so on. Here St. John Chrysostom says: The centurion made himself unworthy to receive Christ into the house, and so he was made worthy of his kingdom. The second thing about the centurion was faith
62 Reading 8.
great; for Christ says: "I have not found so great faith in Israel." Thirdly, wisdom in him, because Christ is omnipotent. Fourthly, goodness, because he so diligently stood for the health of his servant. Now, taking the example of that good pagan, let us be humble to the dear Christ, confessing our misfortune; let us have great faith, believing that he is omnipotent, and that he can do what he pleases; let us be wise, let us learn in the scriptures of wisdom, that we may know God; and finally, let us be good, loving God and our neighbor, and seeking in our souls the health of ourselves and of Him. Amen.
