66 Reading 10.
SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.
S. Matt. in chapter 11, verses 25-30.
At that time (when he had cursed the unbelieving Jews, and when the apostles came, saying that the devils were subject to them], Jesus looked up to heaven and said: I praise you (giving thanks) Father, Lord of heaven and earth (and thus creator of all things)! that you have hidden these things (the secret of my coming) from the wise (who thought to themselves
are wise] and prudent (i.e. clever], and has revealed them to the little ones (i.e. humble). So, Father! if it were so before you (or you). All things (and that I am and that I have all things) have been given to me by my Father; and no one has known (from eternity) the Son, except the Father, nor has he known the Father (from eternity), except the Son (and the Holy Spirit), and to whomsoever the Son wills to reveal him. Come to me, all you who are faithful in hope and love, to your father and brother], who labor (or work) and are burdened (with heavy burdens), and I will feed (or correct) you; take (willingly) my yoke (my new law) upon you, and learn from me (not the creator of the world) that I am gentle [in conduct] and humble of heart (inwardly in soul], and you will find (both here and after death) rest (from misery) for your souls; for my yoke (love of God and neighbor) is sweet, and my burden is light.
Our gracious Savior, thanks be to God the Father, because man, because he hid his secrets and gifts from the proud wise men of this world, and revealed them to the humble, calls to himself all who strive or work for their salvation from grace, and commands them to take upon themselves his commandment, which is to love God and their neighbor, and to be meek and humble, as he was meek and humble of heart, who loves God and our salvation. And this we should do, because it is a light and sweet yoke and burden, and especially because it leads to eternal rest. And thus says the gracious Savior: "I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth!" For three reasons Christ praises God the Father: because he is his eternal father; secondly because he is the lord of the whole world; both when they say: "Father, Lord of heaven and earth," and so of all things that are in heaven and on earth; and the third praises him
Sixth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 67
because he hid the heavenly wisdom from the wise: as were the priests, masters, and scribes; and from all who deal with the world with cunning: as are all who, having abandoned the commandments of God, the meekness and humility of the Savior, have clung to the unworthy gains and customs of this world; and because he revealed the heavenly wisdom to the little ones, that is, to the humble: as were his disciples. And so to hide and reveal the wisdom of God are works of the justice of God, and therefore by the eternal will of God.
Therefore Christ says: "Yes, Father! for so it pleased thee." And here it is not necessary to inquire much further into the causes of God's justice; for as it is just that God should hide his wisdom from the proud and clever, so it is just that he should reveal wisdom to his humble; for if both were not just, then it would not please God the Father. Therefore to him who asks why God chose the poor apostles? the immediate answer is: because it pleased him so. And the greatest sage says: "I praise thee," that is, giving thanks, "Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hidden these things," that is, the mystery of my coming, as well as the interpretation, and the things which ultimately lead to salvation. And what are these things? Hear, that he! "All things are given to me of my Father." Understand from this that he is with the Father, equal in power, in wisdom, and in goodness, so that he is omnipotent, omniscient, and of immeasurable goodness, like the Father; and these things are hidden from the clever pagans, from the Jews, and from other heretics. This was not known by the sage Averroes, who interpreted the books of Aristotle and said that Christians are fools, believing in a trinity in the Godhead; this was not known by the heretic Arrius, who holds that Christ is not the true Son of God alongside the Godhead; nor was this known by the heretic Manichaeus, who says that there are two beginnings, and thus two gods: one who created heavenly things and spirits, and the other who created earthly things. And Christ cleverly defeats you, saying: "Father," that is, my knowledge of the second divine person - this against Arius; "Lord" and thus the creator of heaven and earth and all things - this against Manichean; "all things are given to me from my Father;" because that I am his eternal son, I have this from him, and I am equal to him, being the second person in the divinity - against Averroes, against the Jews, and against all pagans. "All things" also created, "are given to me from my Father," because it is to man; for David says, Psalm 8, 7: He has put all things under his feet
68 Reading 10.
his; for from the incarnation he is the lord of all things, and has all things in his power. "And no one has known the son but the father," that is, by eternal knowledge from himself; "nor the father who has known," also from eternity, "only the son, and to whomsoever the son wills to reveal him." And so the saints in heaven have to know the father of God through the son. Without denying here the holy spirit, saying that he does not know the father and the son, but rather saying that he knows the father and the son; and as he is from the father and the son, so also he has the knowledge of the father of God and of the son of God. But be wise not to say that the father or the son taught the holy spirit, as if he did not know anything before; nor to say that the son of God received what from the father of God, as if he did not have the divinity first: for from eternity all three persons know all things, both the father, and the son, and the holy spirit; Even so, the Son is a powerful lord, like the Father, and so is the Holy Spirit.
And that many are working to know these and other things about the Lord God in grace, because the gracious Savior willingly calls them, saying: "Come to me, all you who labor and are heavy laden." "Come" to me, to your brother, the next humanity; "to me," to your father and creator, the next divinity; "to me," to your physician of your body and soul; "to me," to your defender from the devil; "you who labor" in life
spiritual and laborious, "and you are burdened" by the customs of the old law; "and I will restore you," remove those burdens, and give you light and beneficial provisions for salvation; for "I will feed you" with the bread of my word, the bread of my body, and the bread of the eternal divinity, without burdening you. Therefore "take my yoke upon you," that is, my new law instead of the old, which was heavy; "and learn from me" and accept by deed "that I am gentle in manners, and merciful in vengeance, "and humble in heart," not demanding unjustly
exaltation, and endure adversity with pleasure. And in those two sons of faith, know that in humility and in meekness, "you will find rest for your souls;" heaven is the beginning, the middle, and the end, in which all souls naturally seek rest. For no thing, nor all creation, can finally satisfy the soul, only the divinity itself, which is immeasurable goodness, in which the saints finally rest. Therefore David says, Psalm 17, 15: I will be satisfied, when your glory appears. And Saint Augustine says, Lib. conf.: You have made us, Lord! to yourself
similar, and our heart is restless until it rests in you.
Sixth Sunday after the Nativity of Christ. 69
"For my yoke is easy." The yoke placed on the head, that is, on the will of man's reason, is the loving kindness of God above all things, and of his neighbor as himself. This yoke is very sweet to the soul, which has tasted that the Lord is sweet; as David refers to this tasting, saying, Psalm 34:9: Taste and see that the Lord is sweet. "And my burden is light," that is, my new law is light; for he who loves from the heart, he fulfills it. And so the disciples of Christ, pulling in his stripes, teaching the people the law and bearing the stripes, that is, fulfilling the law, easily bore all labors and sufferings; for they had a humble and meek chariot, a sweet yoke and a light burden. May the merciful Savior, who is blessed with the Father forever, help us to bear this yoke and burden! 
