78 reading 12.
SUNDAY, WHICH IS THE WORD OF THE NINETEENTH.
S. Matt. in chapter 20, verses 1-16.
At that time, Jesus told this parable: The kingdom of heaven (the Son of God Christ) is like a householder who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard. And when he had agreed with the laborers for the daily wage (which is the blessing), he sent them into his vineyard. And going out about the third hour (the second hour), he saw others standing idle in the marketplace; and he said to them, “You also go into my vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.” And they went. And again he went out about the sixth hour [the third hour], and about the ninth hour (the fourth hour], and did likewise. And about the eleventh hour (the fifth hour) he went out and found others standing idle; and he said to them, “Why have you been standing idle all day?” They said to him, “Heb. No one received us. He said to them, “You also go into my vineyard.” And when evening had come, the Lord of the vineyard said to his master, “Call the laborers against the day of judgment and death, and give them their wages, beginning with the last, the apostles, and unto the first, the saints.”the least merit].And when they came, which were at the eleventh hour, even the last hour, as the apostles came, they received the same money (or equal wages). And when they saw the first (the saints of the Old Testament), they thought that they should have received more. And they also received the same money, and having taken it, they murmured (i.e. marveled) against the householder, saying: These last have worked one hour, and thou hast made them equal to us (in reward), who have borne the burden (heavy law) of the day (long time) and the heat (bodily fire). And he answered one of them, saying: Friend, I do thee no wrong: but thou didst agree with me for the day's money (of the blessing); take what is thine and go, for I will give this also to thee. to give to the last, as also to you. And for it is not right for me to do what I want, for your eye is crooked, that I am good. So the last [apostles, who are of the last age are first [i.e., the most worthy, and the first [i.e., the saints of the first age] will be last; for many are called, but few are chosen [to salvation].
Sunday, which is called the ninth. 79
The gracious Savior, by this speech, proves that many are called to salvation, and few are chosen; and He urges the industrious to labor bravely in His vineyard, and gives encouragement to the tardy, so that they may not despair. He also teaches that those who have long worked in His vineyard should not be proud, and that others who have recently come to work in the vineyard should not be despised. And He speaks in parables, saying: "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a householder." The kingdom of heaven is in this place
A. the Son of God, as before this reading said; and he being the head of all the holy church, which is his vineyard, is the master thereof, and has something similar to it, as the master of another man, not Christ, has to the carnal earthly vineyard. And he went out five times to bring workers into that vineyard, that is, into the holy knightly church, which is the assembly of the elect, as long as there are warriors here, standing with Christ against the world, the flesh and the devil. And that church is in some way, likeness of the word vineyard, which has to bring some benefit; in which vineyard in the middle there is one root, from which all the branches sprout, grow, have moisture, and bear fruit; which root itself says in 15 c. 1 and 5 v. S. J.: I am the true root of the vine, and you are the branches. That root is also the householder who sits in his house, in the holy church triumphant in heaven, who does not work in the vineyard, and will sit forever with those who will finally receive money for their work. That householder went out early in the morning to bring the workers into the vineyard, which, as St. Gregory says, is the holy church, which from the first righteous Abel to the last, who will be born at the end of the world, has produced as many branches as it has produced saints. That is St. Gregory.
From this speech you have that the holy church, which is the vineyard of Christ, is the congregation of all the elect, from the first saint to the last, who will finally complete the number of the elect. I have written about this fully in the books about the holy church. The Son of God wanted to plant this vineyard, "he went out first in the morning," you know, in the first age he commanded the angels; and he himself in his own person, although not yet in the body, first admonished that the fathers of the first age of the world should work much for the benefit of that vineyard, as is known about Adam, Seth, Enoch, and others of the first age. And the covenant of rent is a promise of money
B. not a day, which means the blessing that faithful workers will finally have. And means the money blessing
80 Reading 12.
for three things: First, for permanence; for as money is of a permanent thing, which can last a long time, so blessedness is a thing permanent for ever. Second, because money is round, so that in its sphere there is neither end nor beginning: also the reward of the workers, who is the eternal God, has neither end nor beginning. And third, for the inscription; for as on money there is an inscription on bright silver or gold, so in the divinity some parable is written in its brightness, so that the blessed may read the disposition of things, which the Lord God has powerfully, wisely, and willingly created for the comfort of all his faithful.
Then in the second age, as in the third hour, he came out and saw many things, not even emptiness; and he stirred them up not only by internal inspiration and admonition, but also by angelic admonition, as is known of Noah, Eber, Terah, and Abraham, who in the second age worked faithfully. Again he came out in the third and fourth ages, and he did the same, as is known of faithful people from Abraham to David, and from David to the taking of the Jews out of Babylon. And then from the taking of Babylon to the communion of Christ the reading of time was abandoned as futile; for at that time the priests, having given themselves over to covetousness, not telling the people that he was empty, mismanaged the vineyard of the great husbandman, as Christ the husbandman testifies to them.
in the reading S. Mat. v. 21 k. 33-41 v. Then at the eleventh hour the householder, the Son of God in the flesh, came out, and admonished the people to work faithfully, as the holy fathers had worked before.
And here it means that the saints variously interpret the five comings of the householder in different ways in the reading: some, as has already been explained, interpret them in terms of the ages of the world, before the incarnation of the Son of God; and some in terms of the five ages of every man, who in each age has to be admonished and exhorted, so that he may work usefully for salvation. By morning is understood the age of childhood, which lasts up to the age of fourteen. That age is the first for work in the holy vineyard, about which age the Savior says in 10 c. 14 v. S. Mar.: Let the little children come to me. - The second age is youth, from the age of fourteen to the age of eighteen. At that age one must be a full bachelor and a virgin; for most, as at the third hour of the day, the heat increases in them a burning desire for fornication and for vanity. In that
[... doc cuts off here for some reason ...]
