---
layout: sermon
sermon_id: "06"
lang: en
version_name: English - Grok 4
title: Reading for the Fourth Sunday in Advent  
---
### Reading for the Fourth Sunday in Advent.
Saint John writes in the first chapter, verses 19-26. At that time, the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to John, to ask him, saying: Who are you? And he confessed that he was not the Christ, and he did not deny what he was; and he confessed that I am not the Christ. And they asked him: What then? Are you Elijah? And he answered: I am not (that Elijah in person, as you think)! Are you the prophet? And he answered: No (that is, I am not that prophet, as you suppose)! Then they said to him: Who are you? So that we may give an answer to those who sent us; what do you say about yourself? He said: I am the voice of one calling (Christ) in the wilderness (of this world): Prepare [with good deeds] the way of the Lord (of God), as the prophet Isaiah says [in chapter 40, verse 3]. And those who were sent were from the Pharisees (who were most opposed to the truth); and they asked him and said to him: Why then do you baptize, since you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet? John answered them, saying: I baptize with water [that is, I wash with water], but among you stands (both in divinity and in humanity he dwells), the one whom you do not know (that he is God and Christ); he it is who comes after me (to baptize with the Holy Spirit), the one who is made before me [in dignity more worthy in humanity], whose sandal strap I am not worthy to untie (if he had sandals). These things happened in Bethany across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
This holy reading shows the goodness of Saint John and the wickedness of the priests, and thus it teaches faithful Christians to follow in the goodness of Saint John, and to avoid falling into the wickedness of the priests. John's goodness is shown in his confession of the truth and in his humility: he confessed the truth, declaring what he was not, and he did not deny what he was; he showed humility, saying: I am the voice of one calling in the wilderness! The wickedness of the priests, who sent and were sent, is shown in this, that they held the life of Saint John in hatred, as the reading testifies; for they say: "Why then do you baptize?" And our Savior says in S. Mat. chapter 11, verse 18: John came neither eating, that is, meat, nor drinking, that is, wine, and they say: He has a demon! that is, in himself.
Their wickedness is shown secondly in that they were not satisfied with a good answer, but pressed on, saying: "Why then do you baptize, since you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?" Oh, what wickedness today's priests have, who call others who live well devil-possessed! For when they call them heretics and erroneous, then they regard them as devil-possessed. And this our Savior prophesied to his faithful in S. Mat. chapter 10, verse 25, saying: Since they call the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more his household! And just as they forbade John to baptize, saying: Why then do you baptize? So today's priests forbid both preaching and baptizing and serving mass to those who teach God's truth. They themselves do not preach the truth sincerely so that people might leave their sins, and they forbid others; just as those priests did not preach God's law, and they hindered Christ, stopping his mouth, as S. Lukáš witnesses in chapter 11, verse 53, and cursing those who believed in him, as S. Jan witnesses in chapter 9, verse 28. So today's do, sending their messengers both from Rome and from Prague, and obtaining bulls to stop preaching in chapels and to burn books; as happened under Archbishop Zbyněk the priest, and now happens in the confusions of the Prague archbishopric. Alas! They do not obey what God says in this reading: Prepare the way of the Lord! John prepared it; he himself lived well, showed others the way to salvation, punished sins, and by his preaching showed how they should live; therefore he also said: "I am the voice of one calling in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord!"
Here we must note that Saint John humbly confessed his frailty, saying: "I am the voice of one calling in the wilderness," that is: I am called by him who calls in the wilderness. And so understand that Saint John is God's caller, preaching in the wilderness and calling the people to repentance, as Lucae says in chapter 3, verse 8: Do worthy deeds of repentance, for the kingdom of heaven has drawn near. And this calling is done by God, who calls to repentance; God calls man through every creature, as S. Augustin says Lib. 11. Conf.: Heaven and earth and all things that are in heaven and on earth, behold, everywhere they tell me to love you, nor do they cease to tell all people, so that they may have no excuse for not loving God. Secondly, God calls in the wilderness of this world, that every man is very frail; therefore he said to Isaiah in chapter 40, verse 6: Call! And Isaiah: What shall I call? And God to him: All flesh is grass, and all its glory like the flower of the field! Solomon, recognizing this, having been deceived by the vanity of the world, says Eccl. ult., 12, 8: Vanity of vanities, and all things vanity! that is: man, who gives himself to any things whatever, abandoning God, finds for himself nothing but vanity; for the consolation of all things perishes for him. Therefore it is necessary for man to serve God diligently, and to use the things that the Lord God has given him no further than for his praise and for his own salvation; and so first to know himself: who is he? what is he like? where is he? and where will he be? Who? that man created by God and redeemed by his blood; and what is he like? that because of sins he is wretched and unstable in deeds; and where is he? that in the wretched world, which is a true wilderness, full of poisonous snakes, that is, priests and other evil detractors, to whom Saint John and Christ said that they are a generation of vipers. And where will he be? Woe if he falls into eternal fire!
And surely, if man often looked into himself and knew himself, then he could know God and many other things useful to himself. Therefore the wise men wrote above the door of their school: "Know thyself!" so that whoever wants to know wisdom should begin with himself; for whoever does not rightly know himself, how can he know other things? Saint John, knowing himself what he is, humbly confessed that he is the voice of one calling in the wilderness; and he knew and announced the dignity of the Savior, saying: "I baptize with water," showing that he after me will baptize; but among you as God, and also as man he is, whom you because of your sins and lack of knowledge of prophecy do not know. He it is who after me before baptizes, preaches and teaches, as after me he began in life according to humanity, and after me he was born; he who is made before me: not according to divinity made, nor according to humanity first created, but he who before me and before every man is first in dignity.
Here remember that Christ in divinity is not made, and that as man he is made after Saint John, and yet in dignity he is made most first: And this dignity John confesses, saying: "Whose I am not worthy to untie the strap of his sandal." As if he said: And what wonder is it that he is more worthy than I, whom I know was born after me, but I do not fully know the mystery of his birth? So says S. Řehoř In Om. And so by the strap, with which the sandal is fastened to the foot, is understood the union of Christ's humanity with divinity; for the Son of God took upon himself humanity in such a likeness, that just as first there is the foot, and remaining the foot it takes on the sandal and is hidden under the sandal: so divinity in the person of the Son of God took upon itself humanity and remained divinity, hidden from bodily eyes under humanity. And of that union of divinity with humanity John is not worthy to untie, as he says, humbly confessing his inability in that: I am not worthy to untie the strap of his sandal.
From this speech the Black Monks argue against the barefoot ones that Christ walked in shoes like them, saying that John would not speak of his sandal in that way if he did not have one; and the barefoot ones in turn against them say that Christ walked barefoot like them, for otherwise at the feast Mary Magdalene could not have washed his feet with tears. But in this dispute neither they nor these have a good reason, but sin remains to both, that they do not want to follow the poor Christ without desire for goods, and so having excessive desire for goods, both are unshod in feet; but Christ, who for us undertook poverty, in mind was shod from desire for temporal goods, and if he pleased, then sometimes he walked in sandals and sometimes barefoot. And that I dare not untie, whether he ever walked in sandals or never walked; but I have enough in that for me the sinner he walked in the world, as he pleased.
